PRESS COMMUNIQUE

07.05.2025

The Government of India is developing India’s Climate Finance Taxonomy in pursuit of
the announcement made in the Union Budget 2024-25 Paragraph 104 of the budget
speech, which reads as follows:
“We will develop a taxonomy for climate finance for enhancing the availability of capital
for climate adaptation and mitigation. This will support achievement of the country’s
climate commitments and green transition”
2. India's climate finance taxonomy aims to facilitate greater resource flow to climate-friendly
technologies and activities, enabling the country to achieve the vision of being Net Zero by
2070 while also ensuring long-term access to reliable and affordable energy. The Climate
Finance Taxonomy will serve as a tool to identify activities consistent with a country's
climate action goals and transition pathway.
3. A Draft Framework of the Climate Finance Taxonomy has been developed as part of this
exercise. This framework outlines the approach, objectives, and principles that will guide
the taxonomy. It also details the methodology for classifying activities, projects, and
measures that contribute to India's climate commitments, while also taking into account
goals associated with achieving Viksit Bharat by 2047.
4. The draft framework will be the basis for developing sectoral annexures. The sectoral
annexes will outline the measures, activities, and projects considered climate-supportive,
and those identified for promoting the transition.
5.

The Department of Economic Affairs invites public comments (format below) on the
Draft framework. Comments may be emailed to aditi.pathak@gov.in by 25th June 2025
with the Subject “Comments on the Draft Framework for the Taxonomy”. The
comments received through public consultation will be duly considered and examined,
following which the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, will release the
Framework of India’s Climate Finance Taxonomy.

6. Format in which the information/comments may be provided
Name of organisation/person:
Contact details:
Category/Description of person giving comments:
S. No.

Para / Sub Para no

Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs

Comments

Rationale

Framework of India’s Climate Finance Taxonomy | 1

Draft

Framework of
India’s Climate Finance Taxonomy
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs

Framework of India’s Climate Finance Taxonomy | 2

Contents
1.

Introduction and Setting the Context................................................................................. 6
Historical responsibility and per capita emissions..................................................................... 8
Present status of India's climate action ...................................................................................... 9
National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) - Mission Mode Approach .................. 9
Advancing a Diversified Energy Mix .................................................................................. 10
Measures to enhance energy efficiency ............................................................................... 12
Policy and Investment Support ............................................................................................ 13
Progress on India’s 2030 NDC Commitments ........................................................................ 15

2.

Objectives of the Climate Finance Taxonomy ................................................................. 16

3.

Designing India’s Climate Finance Taxonomy ............................................................... 17

4.

Principles of the Climate Finance Taxonomy.................................................................. 20

5.

Approach to the classification of activities, projects and measures contributing

towards India’s climate commitments ..................................................................................... 24
6.

Sectoral coverage................................................................................................................ 26
Power Sector ............................................................................................................................ 27
Mobility ................................................................................................................................... 28
Buildings .................................................................................................................................. 28
Agriculture, Food & Water Security ....................................................................................... 29
Hard-to-abate Sector ................................................................................................................ 30

7.

Public consultation and Next steps ................................................................................... 31

Framework of India’s Climate Finance Taxonomy | 3

Abbreviations
Acronym

Full Form

ACC

Advanced Chemistry Cell

AfDB

African Development Bank

AIDC

Agriculture Infrastructure Development Cess

AIIB

Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank

AMRUT

Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation

AMS

ASEAN Member States

ANZSIC

Australia and New Zealand Standard Industrial Classification

ASEAN

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

AUSC

Advanced Ultra Supercritical

BEE

Bureau of Energy Efficiency

BRTS

Bus Rapid Transit System

CAFE

Corporate Average Fuel Economy

CBI

Climate Bonds Initiative

CCTS

Carbon Credit Trading Scheme

CO2

Carbon Dioxide

DA-JGUA

Dharti Aabha Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan

DNSH

Do No Significant Harm

EBRD

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development

ECSBC

Energy Conservation Sustainable Building Code

EIB

European Investment Bank

EU

European Union

EV

Electric Vehicle

FAME

Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Electric Vehicles

GDP

Gross Domestic Product

GEC

Green Energy Corridor

GFT

Green Finance Taxonomy (South Africa)

GHG

Greenhouse Gas

GLP

Green Loan Principles (Egypt)

Framework of India’s Climate Finance Taxonomy | 4

Acronym

Full Form

GNHCP

Green National Highways Corridor Project

GRIHA

Green Rating for Integrated Habitat Assessment

GVA

Gross Value Added

GW

Gigawatt

HDI

Human Development Index

ICMA

International Capital Market Association

IDB Group

Inter-American Development Bank Group

IDFC

International Development Finance Club

IEA

International Energy Agency

IESS

India Energy Security Scenarios

IFC

International Finance Corporation

IGBC

Indian Green Building Council

IPCC

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

IPSF

International Platform on Sustainable Finance

IsDB

Islamic Development Bank

IWG

Industry Working Group

LED

Light Emitting Diode

LIFE

Lifestyle for Environment

LMA

Loan Market Association

MDBs

Multilateral Development Banks

MoEFCC

Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change

MSC

Makes Significant Contribution

MSME

Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises

MSS

Minimum Social Safeguards

MTOE

Million Tonnes of Oil Equivalent

MVA

Megavolt-Amperes

MW

Megawatt

NABARD

National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development

NAPCC

National Action Plan on Climate Change

NDB

New Development Bank

Framework of India’s Climate Finance Taxonomy | 5

Acronym

Full Form

NDC

Nationally Determined Contribution

NEMMP

National Electric Mobility Mission Plan

NICRA

National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture

PAT

Perform Achieve and Trade

PIB

Press Information Bureau

PLI

Production Linked Incentive

PM E-DRIVE

PM Electric Drive Revolution in Innovative Vehicle Enhancement

PM-KUSUM

Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyan

PMP

Phased Manufacturing Programme

PMUY

Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana

PSM

Payment Security Mechanism

PVTG

Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Group

RIC

Road and Infrastructure Cess

RMT

Remedial Measures to Transition

SAPCC

State Action Plan on Climate Change

SBG

Sustainability Bond Guidelines

SDG

Sustainable Development Goal

SDT

Sector-agnostic Decision Tree

SIDBI

Small Industries Development Bank of India

SLP

Social Loan Principles

SMR

Small Modular Reactor

SPMEPCI

Scheme for Promotion of Manufacturing of Electric Passenger Cars in
India

SSFA

Singapore Sustainable Finance Association

STC

Sectoral Technical Committee

tCO2e

Tonnes of Carbon Dioxide Equivalent

TSC

Technical Screening Criteria

UJALA

Unnat Jyoti by Affordable LEDs for All

UNFCCC

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change

VGF

Viability Gap Funding

Framework of India’s Climate Finance Taxonomy | 6

1.

Introduction and Setting the Context

1.1. India’s climate ambitions are reflected through the Nationally Determined Contributions
(NDCs) and the announcement of Net Zero emissions by 2070. India requires around USD 2.5
trillion (at 2014-15 prices) to meet the NDC targets till 2030.1 As per NITI Aayog’s India Energy
Security Scenarios (IESS) 2047, a scenario-building tool, the total investment required for
energy transition is estimated at ~USD 250 billion per year till 2047.2 However, this cost does
not include the cost of EV infrastructure, demand infrastructure such as new iron and steel
plants, etc.
1.2. Finance for adaptation action is vital for addressing climate change impacts, building
resilience and achieving India’s development goals. Preliminary estimates indicated that about
USD 206 billion (at 2014-15 prices) would be required from 2015 to 2030 to implement
adaptation actions in agriculture, forestry, fisheries, infrastructure, water resources and
ecosystems.3 According to the Initial Adaptation Communication4 submitted by the country in
December 2023, the cumulative expenditure needed for adaptation in a Business as Usual
(BAU) scenario is estimated to be ₹56.68 trillion (approx. USD 648.5 billion)5 till 2030 at 202324 prices.
1.3. The country has also announced its vision to be ‘Viksit’ or ‘developed’ by 2047. At
present, India’s energy consumption per capita is about one-fifth6 of the developed countries
and would need to appreciate significantly during the Amrit Kaal, a period of rapid economic
growth. Estimates suggest that the minimum level of per capita final energy requirement for
India to become a developed country with an HDI of 0.9 must be in the range of 45.7 to 75

gigajoules per year7 when the total final consumption of energy per capita for FY23 was 16.7
gigajoules8 only.
1.4. The country has adopted an ambitious strategy to reduce emission intensity and enhance
non-fossil fuel composition in the installed electricity capacity while expanding forest and tree
cover to create an additional carbon sink. To champion and cultivate a vibrant, sustainable
lifestyle grounded in the rich traditions and core values of conservation and moderation, the
mass movement for ‘LIFE – Lifestyle for Environment’ serves as a vital cornerstone of our
strategic vision. This initiative aims to inspire individuals and communities to embrace practices
that nurture both personal well-being and the health of our planet. Given the size of resources
required for financing India’s ambitious climate action, Union Budget 2024-25 announced that
the taxonomy for Climate Finance would be developed for “enhancing the availability of capital
for climate adaptation and mitigation”.9
1.5. Given the complexity of the exercise and in alignment with international experience, the
proposed work will be conducted in two distinct phases. The first phase will establish the
foundational framework and the approach. Following this, the second phase will involve the
classification of activities, measures, and projects that are climate-supportive, along with those
facilitating transition in specific sectors and industries. This phased approach aims to enhance
clarity and transparency for investors while ensuring that the taxonomy remains aligned with
India’s developmental goals and climate commitments. Acknowledging that taxonomy must
continually evolve in scope and depth to reflect the dynamic nature of the economy, it will be a
living document that will be reviewed and updated from time to time. While achieving
interoperability and ensuring alignment with global taxonomies is essential and will be pursued,
the unique circumstances of the country will ultimately shape the development of the taxonomy.
This approach will facilitate both domestic and foreign financial institutions in identifying
investment opportunities in climate-related activities and will also help mitigate the risk of
greenwashing.

Historical responsibility and per capita emissions
1.6. India's per capita GHG emissions stood at approximately 2.9 tCO2e in 2023, significantly
lower than the World average of 6.7 tCO2e. In comparison, the per capita emissions of the
European Union stood at 6.9 tCO2e, Japan at 8.3 tCO2e, the United States at 17.2 tCO2e and
Canada at 20.4 tCO2e for the same year. This stark contrast underscores India's relatively
minimal contribution to global emissions.11
1.7. Developed countries have been the predominant contributors to cumulative historical
emissions and continue to have higher per capita emission levels. Developed nations peaked
their emissions decades ago, the EU in the 1970s and the US in the early 2000s.12 However,
most of these countries have set a mid-century (by 2050) target towards net zero, allowing them
relatively longer timelines for emission reductions than developing countries that are yet to
reach peak emissions but are already facing increasing pressure to adopt similar trajectories over
a much shorter timeframe.
1.8. The pace of transition has significant implications for development trajectories. A steep
transition pathway relies on access to finance, advanced technologies, and critical mineral
resources, all of which pose significant challenges related to access and availability of such
resources at a reasonable cost. Further, a rapid transition may substantially increase costs and
could divert resources from other developmental priorities.13 A balanced and pragmatic
approach that considers a country’s unique circumstances, development priorities, and access to
essential resources will, therefore, be critical for designing sustainable and inclusive low-carbon
pathways.

Present status of India's climate action
1.9. India’s Climate Action is circumscribed by the commitments made through the NDC
submitted to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 2016
and its subsequent update in 2022. The NDC is focused on reducing the emission intensity of
the GDP, enhancing the non-fossil energy installed capacities in electric power generation, and
creating additional carbon sinks. Further, adaptation is recognised as an essential intervention
reflected through the focus on enhancing investments in development programmes in sectors
that are vulnerable to climate change, particularly agriculture, water resources, the Himalayan
region, coastal regions, and health and disaster management. The approach considers the
mobilisation of new and additional funds as capacity building and development of domestic
frameworks vital for research & development and diffusion of cutting-edge climate
technologies. India has embraced a comprehensive action plan to promote low-carbon
development and build resilience to the impact of climate change. The efforts below reflect
India’s multi-pronged strategy to enhance energy security, reduce carbon intensity, and support
sustainable development while moving towards its Net Zero goals.
National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) - Mission Mode Approach
1.10. The NAPCC charts a course to enhance the sustainability of India’s development pathway,
integrating high economic growth and building resilience to climate change. It encompasses
nine national missions, addressing critical areas such as solar energy, water, energy efficiency,
forests, sustainable habitat, sustainable agriculture, the Himalayan ecosystem, strategic climate
knowledge, and, more recently, human health. A comprehensive set of climate actions, spanning
adaptation, mitigation, and demand-side management, is being implemented through these
missions.
1.11. In tandem, states and union territories have been encouraged to prepare State Action Plans
on Climate Change (SAPCCs) aligned with the overarching NAPCC framework and reflect
local vulnerabilities, priorities, and capacities. As of July 2024, thirty-four SAPCCs have been
formulated and are under implementation.14 These plans integrate adaptation and mitigation
strategies into development planning and are supported through financial and technical
assistance from the central government and development partners. This sub-national climate
planning framework ensures decentralised action and strengthens India’s climate resilience from
the ground up.
Advancing a Diversified Energy Mix
1.12. India is progressing towards a diversified energy mix, focusing on expanding renewable
energy, bioenergy, nuclear, and storage solutions. As of February 2025, non-fossil fuel sources
account for 47.4 per cent of the total installed electricity generation capacity. Within this, solar
comprises 21.8 per cent, wind 10.3 per cent, hydro 10.0 per cent, and nuclear 1.7 per cent15.
India is rapidly scaling up solar energy through grid and off-grid initiatives. The Solar Parks
Scheme and Ultra-Mega Solar Power Projects aim to establish 40,000 MW capacity, with 55
solar parks already sanctioned across 13 states, totalling 39.9 GW, of which 12.2 GW has been
commissioned as of December 2024. In wind energy, states such as Tamil Nadu, Gujarat,
Maharashtra, and Karnataka continue to lead.
1.13. Decentralised solar deployment is the focus of the PM KUSUM scheme. The Scheme has
three components targeted to achieve solar power capacity addition of 34.8 GW by 31.3.2026.
These include setting up of 10,000 MW of decentralised ground/stilt mounted solar power plants
on barren/fallow/pasture/marshy/ cultivable land of farmers (Component A), installation of 14
lakh stand-alone solar pumps in off-grid areas (Component B) and solarisation of 35 lakh gridconnected agriculture pumps through individual and feeder level solarisation (Component C).
By the end of March 2025, over 7.7 lakh stand-alone solar agriculture pumps have been installed
and over 3.3 lakh grid-connected agriculture pumps have been solarised16.
1.14. Additionally, PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana aims at supplying solar power to one
crore households by March 2027,17 and the New Solar Power Scheme under PM JANMAN and
Dharti Aabha Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan (DA-JGUA) is electrifying one lakh unelectrified tribal and Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Group (PVTG) households across over
63,843 villages, with provisions for off-grid solar lighting in 1,500 Multi-Purpose Centres and
solarisation of 2,000 public institutions.18
1.15. To promote offshore wind, the government has introduced a Viability Gap Funding (VGF)
scheme, featuring a total budget of ₹7,453 crore, with ₹6,853 crore allocated for 1 GW capacity
off the coasts of Gujarat and Tamil Nadu, and ₹600 crore for port infrastructure upgrades.19 The
Green Energy Corridor (GEC) initiative is enhancing transmission infrastructure, with GEC-I
installing 9,136 circuit kilometres of transmission lines and 21,413 megavolt-amperes (MVA)
substations across eight states20, and GEC-II underway in seven21 more.22
1.16. At the same time, coal-based power will continue to play a role in ensuring energy
security, particularly for meeting base-load demand. Efforts are underway to improve the
efficiency of thermal power generation through the deployment of supercritical (SC), ultrasupercritical (USC), and Advanced Ultra Supercritical (AUSC) technologies. These upgrades
can significantly increase the efficiency of coal consumption and reduce emissions per unit of
electricity generated. Cleaner coal technologies form a pragmatic strategy to ensure a stable,
lower-emission baseload supply, complementing the intermittency of renewable sources and
enabling a smoother transition to a low-carbon energy system while ensuring a stable power
supply.
1.17. The National Bioenergy Programme supports waste-to-energy, biomass cogeneration, and
biogas plants. As of December 2024, grid-connected biomass capacity reached ~9.8 GW and
off-grid biogas capacity was around 0.92 GW equivalent. In addition, India is advancing the
National Green Hydrogen Mission, targeting 5 million metric tonnes per annum of green
hydrogen by 2030, with awarded capacities of 412,000 tonnes for production and 3,000 MW of
electrolyser manufacturing.23
1.18. The Nuclear Energy Mission, announced in Union Budget 2025–26 with a ₹20,000 crore
outlay, aims to develop Small Modular Reactors (SMRs) indigenously and increase nuclear
capacity to 100 GW by 2047.
1.19. The transition to clean cooking fuel has reached near saturation through the Pradhan
Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) in 2023,24 significantly improving energy access for
households.
Measures to enhance energy efficiency
1.20. Enhancing energy efficiency has been at the core of India’s strategy to reduce emission
intensity. The market-driven initiative of the Perform Achieve and Trade (PAT) Scheme,
launched in 2012, aims to improve energy efficiency in energy-intensive industries by setting
reduction targets for Designated Consumers (DCs). As of March 2023, the scheme had saved
approximately 26 million tonnes of oil equivalent (MTOE) and reduced over 70 million tonnes
of CO2 emissions.25 Following a 2022 amendment to the Energy Conservation Act, the Carbon
Credit Trading Scheme (CCTS) was introduced, covering the energy-intensive sectors that were
earlier covered under PAT. Nine sectors26, including Aluminium, Cement, and Steel, have been
identified for inclusion under CCTS.
1.21. Simultaneously, energy efficiency measures are being actively promoted through both
schemes and regulatory interventions, such as the Prime Minister’s Unnat Jyoti By Affordable
LEDs for All (UJALA) scheme, which has led to the widespread adoption of LED lighting,
reducing household electricity consumption. Energy efficiency in the building sector is being
driven by the Energy Conservation Sustainable Building Code (ECSBC) for commercial
buildings, Eco Niwas Samhita for residential buildings, star ratings for commercial buildings,
energy-efficient homes, and net zero energy buildings (Shunya Labelling). Additionally, it has
become mandatory for all new Government buildings to adhere to the Green Rating for
Integrated Habitat Assessment (GRIHA) ratings to promote resource-efficient and sustainable
construction practices, including energy efficiency standards for reduced environmental
impact.27 The Star Labelling Programme for appliances by the Bureau of Energy Efficiency
(BEE) encourages the use of energy-efficient electrical appliances across residential and
commercial sectors.28
Policy and Investment Support
1.22. The Production-Linked Incentive (PLI) schemes are designed to promote the
manufacturing of high-efficiency solar PV modules and enhance the production of electric and
hydrogen fuel cell vehicles.29 The National Programme on Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC)
Battery Storage aims to boost domestic battery production, while the Phased Manufacturing
Programme (PMP) focuses on localising electric vehicle (EV) components to strengthen India's
supply chain.
1.23. The Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Electric Vehicles (FAME) Scheme has
encouraged the adoption of electric two-wheelers, three-wheelers, four-wheelers, and buses,
along with the expansion of charging infrastructure.30 Building on this foundation, the PM
Electric Drive Revolution in Innovative Vehicle Enhancement (PM E-DRIVE) Scheme was
launched in September 2024 to accelerate EV adoption across various categories, including
electric two-wheelers, three-wheelers, trucks, buses, and ambulances.31
1.24. Additionally, the PM e-Bus Sewa - Payment Security Mechanism (PSM) Scheme ensures
financial security for deploying 38,000 electric buses.32 The Scheme for Promotion of
Manufacturing of Electric Passenger Cars in India (SPMEPCI) launched in March 2024,
encourages domestic value addition to promote localised EV manufacturing.
1.25. Ongoing initiatives by relevant ministries further reinforce India's transition to clean
energy.33 For instance, the Ministry of Power issued revised guidelines in September 2024 that
established uniform standards for EV charging infrastructure and streamlined electricity
connections. Meanwhile, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways introduced green
license plates, exempted battery-operated vehicles from permit requirements, and urged states
to waive road tax to lower upfront costs. Additionally, the Ministry of Housing and Urban
Affairs has amended the Model Building Bye-Laws to require the installation of EV charging
stations in private and commercial buildings, ensuring wider access to charging infrastructure.34
1.26. The Union Budget 2024-25 envisages action on pumped storage, the development of small
modular nuclear reactors, and advanced ultra-supercritical (AUSC) thermal power plants,
strengthening energy security and grid stability while diversifying India's clean energy
portfolio.35
1.27. Further, India has taken steps to put an implicit price on carbon. Fiscal instruments such
as the GST Compensation Cess on coal at ₹400 per tonne, along with specific levies including
the Central Excise Duty, Additional Excise Duty, Road and Infrastructure Cess (RIC), and
Agriculture Infrastructure Development Cess (AIDC) on petrol and diesel, have together
contributed to establishing a comparatively high implicit carbon tax. These measures serve to
discourage fossil fuel consumption and reflect India’s commitment to integrating climate
considerations into its fiscal architecture.

Progress on India’s 2030 NDC Commitments
1.28. India’s proactive measures have yielded positive results, with many targets under its first
Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) achieved ahead of schedule. India achieved 40 per
cent cumulative electrical power installed capacity from non-fossil fuel sources in 2021, well
before the 2030 target. Similarly, the emission intensity of GDP was reduced by 33 per cent
from 2005 levels by 2019—nine years ahead of the target year. Recognising the progress, India
revised its NDC in August 2022, enhancing the target to reduce GDP emission intensity to 45
per cent (up from 33-35 per cent) by 2030 and increasing the target for non-fossil fuel-based
cumulative electric power installed capacity to 50 per cent (from the earlier 40 per cent). India
has successfully established an installed electricity generation capacity of 222.85 GW from nonfossil fuel sources, which account for 47.4 per cent of the total capacity as of 28 February 2025.36
There has been notable progress in energy generation from non-fossil fuels, including nuclear,
hydro, and renewable sources. This segment reached 420.8 thousand gigawatt hours in the 202223 provisional data, making up 22.8 per cent of the total gross energy generation. Within this,
large hydro represents 8.81 per cent, nuclear contributes 2.79 per cent, and renewables account
for 11.52 per cent.37
1.29. The extensive cross-sectoral measures adopted across the economy, coupled with schemes
promoting energy efficiency and influencing consumer and producer behaviour, have
significantly impacted emissions growth. A report by the International Finance Corporation
lauds India’s commitment to its climate goals, identifying it as the only G20 nation aligned with
the 2°C global warming threshold38. Significantly, these achievements have been mainly driven
by domestic resources, reflecting India’s reliance on internal capabilities for climate action.
However, meeting its updated NDC targets requires an estimated USD 2.5 trillion (at 2014–15
prices) by 2030. To bridge this significant financing gap, access to affordable finance and
advanced technology—particularly from developed countries, as stipulated under the UNFCCC
and the Paris Agreement—is critical for sustaining and scaling India’s climate efforts.

2.Objectives of the Climate Finance Taxonomy

2.1. The climate finance taxonomy is a tool to identify activities consistent with India’s climate
action goals and transition pathway. The objective is to facilitate greater resource flow to
climate-friendly technologies and activities, enabling achievement of the country’s vision to be
Net Zero by 2070 while also ensuring long-term access to reliable and affordable energy. The
taxonomy should also prevent "greenwashing"39. The taxonomy shall be consistent with the
developmental goal of ‘Viksit Bharat’ to be achieved by 2047. Specifically, the taxonomy will
cover technologies, measures, projects and activities that are aligned to:
a) Mitigation- which includes improvements in energy efficiency or reduction in emission
intensity, and avoidance of GHG emissions including through the expansion of non-fossil
fuel energy, etc.,
b) Adaptation- action that enhances resilience, including sustainable water management,
ecosystem protection and restoration, and geography-specific adaptation measures to
lower the negative impacts of climate change.
c) Support transition of hard-to-abate sectors- Transition activities in line with the
specific pathway for hard-to-abate industries, innovation and R&D facilitate low carbon
pathways considering the available technology, its access and viability.

39

Greenwashing in the context of the Climate Finance Taxonomy refers to misrepresentation of activities as being
climate-aligned, either intentional or due to gross negligence.


3.Designing India’s Climate Finance Taxonomy

3.1. There are broadly two aspects to framing a taxonomy - qualitative and quantitative40. The
exposition of the objectives and principles that guide the identification of activities and projects
as being climate-relevant forms the qualitative part, while the quantitative aspect is reflected in
the form of performance thresholds like the expected extent of GHG savings, best-in-class
performance41, and improvements in emission intensity. In most cases, the qualitative aspect
forms the basis for the quantitative aspects of the taxonomy.
3.2. Qualitative elements can define the core principles guiding green activities and align with
India’s NDCs and SDGs. Quantitative elements, such as GHG intensity reduction thresholds
and sustainability performance metrics, can provide measurable targets for transparency and
accountability. A hybrid approach that combines qualitative principles with quantitative
metrics ensures that the taxonomy remains inclusive, addressing India's diverse industrial
structure and responding to new targets, regulatory changes, and policy dynamics while
promoting a science-based trajectory for climate transition.
3.3. The formulation of the taxonomies in most jurisdictions has also mainly been an iterative
process, beginning with the qualitative aspects and moving on to the quantitative aspects. They
have been periodically reviewed. For instance, ASEAN introduced their 3rd version in 2024
(versions 1 and 2 were in 2021 and 2023, respectively), while the EU initiated the process in
2018 with an Action Plan on financing sustainable growth, the taxonomy regulation was brought
out in 2020 following which, the Technical Screening Criteria (TSC) was finalised during 20212342.
3.4. Given the considerable amount of climate finance required, the long pathway to Net Zero,
and the wide and complex nature of sectors and activities to be covered, the taxonomy should
allow updation, inclusions, and enhancement of scope. India’s taxonomy on climate finance will
be a living document. It will be periodically reviewed to capture the evolving requirements and
to progressively cover sectors, projects and activities reflecting the dynamic landscape of
investments for climate finance.
3.5. The implementation of the hybrid approach will be in a phased manner, starting with
qualitative criteria to provide a broad framework that aligns with national priorities, such as
inclusive growth, Net Zero goal by 2070, and sector-specific low-carbon pathways. Over time,
quantitative thresholds and benchmarks will be incorporated, as appropriate, for greater
precision. Where quantitative thresholds are incorporated, relative performance targets (e.g.,
percentage improvements) rather than absolute benchmarks would be considered. The phased
development will allow flexibility to address technological challenges and data constraints,
particularly in sectors like Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)43 and agriculture.
3.6. Recognising the diversity in capacities within industrial organisations across sectors in
India, the taxonomy will ensure inclusivity and proportionality. For the MSME sector, the
taxonomy will follow a staggered approach with simplified criteria and processes to reduce the
burden of adoption in view of their technological and resource constraints while encouraging
their participation in climate initiatives. The intervention will duly incorporate these needs
including through i) specific thresholds and criteria for MSMEs; ii) simplified reporting, and iii)
capacity-building.
3.7. Considering the country’s geography and varied agro-climatic zones, which lead to
vulnerability to climate change, the taxonomy will emphasise adaptation and building resilience
to ensure that developmental gains are not adversely impacted. The agriculture sector is the
backbone of the economy, is pivotal for maintaining food security and has a predominant
presence of small and marginal farmers. The sector, therefore, requires measures to continuously
adapt to build its resilience to climate change, and this will be the central theme of the taxonomy
in the context of Agriculture.

4.Principles of the Climate Finance Taxonomy

4.1. The Indian Climate Finance Taxonomy is based on eight principles that set down the wireframe of the classification guiding the identification and delineation of the criteria, activities,
projects and/or technologies as applicable. It has been formulated on the basis of consultations
on the concept note and a review of existing taxonomies. Further refinements will be based on
public consultations on the draft framework. The principles that will form the basis of the
framework are as follows:
a) Consistency with stated position on Climate Action and development priorities:
Nationally Determined Contribution, the announcement of Net Zero carbon emissions by
2070, country-determined transition pathways and India’s Viksit Bharat@2047 ambitions to
achieve developed country status by 2047 and energy security for all should be the basis to
determine the activities recognised as being consistent with the climate finance framework.
b) Do no significant harm to other objectives of the climate finance taxonomy: Implement
measures and projects that prevent or minimise adverse effects on other climate objectives,
ensuring that efforts to address one issue do not disproportionately harm others. This shall
allow for incorporating safeguards, where necessary to be consistent with the objectives of
the taxonomy.
c) Focusing on pathways and trajectories in the country context: The pathways and
trajectories in line with country circumstances are essential. The taxonomy should contribute
to a reduction in carbon emission intensity or long-term low carbon pathways recognising that
immediate compliance with stringent standards may not be feasible in the short run or for all
sectors.44
d) Interoperability and consistency: While striving for alignment with international
frameworks and taxonomies to the extent possible, the Indian taxonomy for Climate Finance
will reflect and allow flexibility considering the country's context, development priorities and
national climate goals.
e) Support Transition Activities: As stated in the ICMA guidelines on taxonomies45, “the real
challenge is enabling the market to finance the transition rather than unintentionally
restricting it to what is already considered exemplary.” The taxonomy should facilitate a
dynamic and inclusive classification system that recognises and supports sectors crucial for
transition46, facilitating investment in critical sectors during their transition phase.
f) Promoting the use of Indigenous technologies: The taxonomy should strive to enhance
investments in Indigenous technologies by incentivising the adoption of such technologies
and Research and Development (R&D) on a preferred basis.
g) Be science-based and transparent: The approach should be objective, supported by clearly
defined and disclosed metrics, and should rely on transparent and robust methodologies to
identify investment opportunities. Principles for inclusion in climate mitigation projects can
be based on avoiding GHG, reducing GHG or carbon emission intensity, enhancing GHG
removals and long-term storage of GHGs. Similarly, adaptation and resilience activities can
be based on the principle of increasing resilience and reducing the risk and vulnerability to
climate hazards, reducing or preventing the adverse impact of current and future climate risks
and hazards on the activity itself or nature, assets and people and improve the adaptive
capacity and strengthen the resilience of assets, and people.
h) Proportionality - Support for MSMEs: The taxonomy should incorporate specific
provisions to ensure that resource flows to MSMEs are not adversely impacted. The taxonomy
shall include simplified and proportionate criteria for MSMEs to facilitate their inclusion in
the climate finance framework, addressing their resource constraints and ensuring their
smooth transition to low-carbon pathways. Proportionality criteria, capacity-building, and
simplified reporting mechanisms shall be implemented by financial institutions/regulators to
address the unique challenges of the MSMEs to support their climate transition.
4.2. The above principle will be central to the sector specific taxonomies to be formulated.
5.Approach to the classification of activities, projects
and measures contributing towards India’s climate
commitments

5.1. The classification will be guided by the principles set down in this framework. The
taxonomy will classify activities and projects into two baskets - Climate supportive and
climate transition. The taxonomy will adopt a graded approach, classifying activities at
various levels47.
5.2. Climate-supportive activities would include the activities, projects and measures that
contribute to one or more objectives set out in this framework (Table 1), through at least one
of the following:
i.

Avoiding GHG emissions

ii.

Reducing emission intensity

iii.

Deploys adaptation solutions that reduce the risk of adverse impacts of climate change

iv.

R&D to meet one or more objectives of the framework


Tier 1

Qualifying Criteria
a) This includes activities, projects, and measures
leading to absolute emission avoidance, including
non-fossil fuel sources.
b) Includes activities, projects, and measures that
contribute to a reduction in emission intensity
(beyond a certain factor), have defined pathways for
further

improvement,

and

also

adaptation and resilience building.

47

Transition activities in line with the specific pathway for hard to abate industries.

contribute

to

Framework of India’s Climate Finance Taxonomy | 25

Activities/ Projects/
Measures

Category

Qualifying Criteria
c) In adaptation and resilience building, this includes all
activities, projects and measures that enhance climate
resilience.

Climate
Supportive
Tier 2

a) Activities, projects and measures that contribute to a
reduction in emission intensity and have defined
pathways for further improvement.
b) Activities, projects or measures that improve energy
efficiency and/or reduce emission intensity in sectors
where absolute emission avoidance is currently not
viable due to the lack of or non-viable alternative
technology, and also contribute to adaptation and
resilience building.
c) Activities, projects and measures that improve
adaptation and enhance resilience but may lead to
unmitigated GHG emissions due to technological
constraints or other constraints such as access to
viable technologies.

5.3. Transition activities would include activities, projects and measures for which there is
no technologically and economically feasible low-emission alternative in India (Table 2).
Table 2: Transition activities, projects and measures
Activities/ Projects/
Measures

Category

Qualifying Criteria

Name of Activities,

Transition

Activities, projects and measures that improve energy

projects and measures

Supportive efficiency and/or reduce emission intensity in sectors where

(including ISIC codes or

absolute emission avoidance is currently not viable or due to

NIC codes where

the lack of alternative technology

available)



5.4. These activities, projects and measures should not lead to stranded assets where further
reductions in emissions or emission intensity are not feasible in the short run due to
technological constraints or other constraints such as access to economically viable
technologies. Further, as long as the transition is in line with the stated policy of the
Government, it will be considered to meet the objectives of this framework.
Figure 6: Approach of the Taxonomy: Constituent Elements

6.

Sectoral coverage

6.1. The framework document sets down the rationale, objectives, principles and approach
that will govern the classification of activities, projects and measures related to identified
sectors added in the form of Annexures to the framework document over time. The taxonomy
is a living document and further additions may be brought in subsequent annexures to the
framework document.
6.2. To begin with, the following sectors shall be considered:
•

Power, Mobility, and Buildings in the context of climate mitigation and adaptation
co-benefits.

•

Agriculture, food and water security will be in the context of climate adaptation and
resilience building.

•

Addressing transition, in line with country circumstances, in hard-to-abate sectors.
Iron and Steel and Cement shall be considered at the outset.

Framework of India’s Climate Finance Taxonomy | 27

The subsequent section discusses the rationale for including the identified sectors and
industries in the first version.

Power Sector
6.3. The power sector is a key driver of industrial and commercial activities, and it plays a
pivotal role in sustaining economic expansion and enabling social development. Access to
reliable and affordable electricity is essential for powering industries, supporting agriculture,
and enhancing livelihoods through small and medium enterprises (SMEs). As per India’s
fourth Biennial Update Report to UNFCCC in 2024, electricity production accounted for 39
per cent of total GHG emissions in 2020.48
6.4. The power sector is integral to achieving the government’s vision of Viksit
Bharat@2047. As India moves toward its Net Zero goals, balancing power generation from
diverse sources—renewables, thermal, nuclear, and hybrid systems—will be crucial for
sustaining economic momentum. This mix includes renewables such as solar, wind, and
bioenergy, alongside advanced technologies like nuclear, green hydrogen, and storage
solutions.
6.5. According to estimates, the country needs to scale up investments substantially to
enhance the installed capacity to 777.14 GW by 2029-3049 from 470.4 GW (as of February
2025)50. Considering the scale, strategic investments are required in Advanced Ultra Super
Critical (AUSC) thermal power plants, which reduce emissions through higher efficiency,
improving plant efficiency to 46 per cent, surpassing subcritical (~38 per cent) and
supercritical (~41–42 per cent) technologies.51
6.6. Nuclear energy can also provide reliable baseload power with no carbon footprint. The
Union Budget 2024-25 identified nuclear energy as a key pillar of the Viksit Bharat.52 The
Union Budget 2025-26 further introduced the Nuclear Energy Mission with a ₹20,000 crore
outlay for Small Modular Reactors (SMR) research and development, targeting at least five
indigenously developed SMRs by 2033. Amendments to the Atomic Energy Act and the Civil
Liability for Nuclear Damage Act are envisaged, toward achieving 100 GW of nuclear
capacity by 2047 to support India’s energy transition and security goals.53
Mobility
6.7. Transport is a key contributor to the GDP, accounting for 4.5 per cent of India’s Gross
Value Added (GVA) in 2022-23 (National Account Statistics 202454). In 2020, India’s
transport sector accounted for 13.28 per cent of the total emissions of the energy sector
(MoEFCC, 202455). As India progresses towards Viksit Bharat, the mobility sector is likely
to grow at a substantive pace.
6.8. There have been several Government initiatives to transition the transport sector to a
low-carbon pathway. Key amongst these, include, the Emission Standards and Auto Fuel
Policy of 2003, Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE), Harit Path, Green National
Highways Corridor Project (GNHCP), National Electric Mobility Mission Plan (NEMMP),
Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Hybrid and Electric Vehicles (FAME), Expansion of
Metro Networks, Bus Rapid Transit System (BRTS), and the Ethanol Blended Petrol
Programme.56
6.9. Going forward, while fossil fuels will continue to play an essential role in India’s
transport sector in the short to medium term, there is a need for promoting the technologies
and measures that are less carbon-intensive and to facilitate the flow of investment to aid the
transition.
Buildings
6.10. The building sector will be at the core of India’s growth and development in the Amrit
Kaal. Rapid urbanisation drives demand for housing and infrastructure, and this will be a
defining feature of India’s development as cities continue to grow. The Government of India
is focusing on incentivising strategies to minimise energy and material consumption in the
building sector through design and technology. India's National Mission for Sustainable
Habitat (NMSH) addresses this through programs like Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and
Urban Transformation (AMRUT) and Smart Cities Mission. The Energy Conservation
Building Code (ECBC) 2017 and its residential counterpart, Eco Niwas Samhita (ENS),
promote energy efficiency. The Star Rating Scheme incentivises energy-efficient commercial
buildings. The Unnat Jyoti By Affordable LEDs for All (UJALA) scheme promotes efficient
appliances, and the Standards and Labelling (S&L) program sets appliance efficiency
standards. Building certifications such as Green Rating for Integrated Habitat Assessment
(GRIHA) and Indian Green Building Council (IGBC) standards are playing an important role
in enhancing energy efficiency and sustainability. The Central government has made it
mandatory for all the new buildings of public sector undertakings and those of the government
to comply with GRIHA norms.57
6.11. As India's building sector undergoes transformation, strategic interventions and private
sector engagement are required to promote sustainable growth. To support India's Net Zero
ambitions, the climate finance taxonomy will categorise activities, projects and measures
based on their emissions intensity reduction potential, guiding investments and policies to
sustainable construction practices, energy-efficient technologies, and climate adaptation
measures to enhance resilience against extreme weather.
Agriculture, Food & Water Security
6.12. Agriculture and climate change are deeply interconnected, with all agricultural sectors
highly vulnerable to climate-related disruptions. India's agriculture and allied activities sector,
contributes 16 per cent of GDP (FY24 PE) and employs 46.1 per cent of the population. While
the sector has maintained 5 per cent annual growth (FY17–FY23), its heavy dependence on
monsoon variability poses significant risks, especially since only 55 per cent of the net sown
area is irrigated58. The implications of erratic monsoon patterns are particularly pronounced
for marginal and small-scale farmers, representing approximately 85 per cent of India's
agricultural holdings. These farmers typically cultivate on plots less than 2 hectares in size,
making them highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate variability.

6.13. The adverse effects of climate change on agriculture present a significant risk to
livelihoods and food security, emphasising the urgent need for resilience-building measures.
The studies conducted under National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA)
showed that in the absence of adaptation measures, climate change is likely to reduce the
yield of rainfed and irrigated rice, wheat, kharif maize etc.
6.14. Despite agriculture being one of the sectors with the highest need for adaptation finance
to meet national climate goals, climate-related finance to agrifood systems remains limited
and continues to decrease relative to global climate finance flows59. Investing in agricultural
adaptation is crucial to ensuring the long-term sustainability of the sector. There is a need for
greater private sector participation for modernisation, climate resilience, and infrastructure
development particularly in post-harvest facilities that reduce waste and enhance farmer
incomes. Further, scaling up investment in R&D on climate-resilient crop varieties, precision
irrigation, and sustainable farming technologies is critical for enhancing productivity,
mitigating climate risks, and ensuring India’s food security amid increasing climate
variability.
Hard-to-abate Sector
6.15. For Viksit Bharat by 2047, enhancing physical infrastructure will be of paramount
importance. Within the spectrum of industries that can bolster infrastructure development, the
iron and steel, aluminium, and cement industries are of particular importance. The
development of public infrastructure and industrial growth is anticipated to generate
considerable demand for these industries, given their critical role in providing essential
materials.
6.16. However, at the same time, there is a pressing need to promote low-emission production
in line with India’s climate ambitions. Emissions from these industries are hard to abate due
to their reliance on energy, complex processes and technologies that have high emissions, and
existing gaps in research and development of technologies to reduce their emission intensity.
While these industries are inherently capital-intensive, their transition to low-emission
technologies will be even more capital-intensive. An orderly transition of this sector is key to
India’s development strategy. Investments need to flow not only towards the development of
low-emission technologies but also to support the modernisation and capacity enhancement
of existing facilities, avoiding the risks of stranded assets and sunk costs.
6.17. The climate finance taxonomy aims to direct investment towards the hard-to-abate
sectors to support the development of indigenous low-emission production technologies,
large-scale deployment of mature climate technologies, and the building of domestic
expertise for a gradual transition to low-emission pathways. The focus will initially be on the
Iron and Steel and Cement industries, with provisions for periodic review to accommodate
evolving requirements and progressively include other hard-to-abate sectors such as
fertilisers, aluminium, and more.

7.

Public consultation and Next steps

7.1. The Climate finance taxonomy will consist of two parts - the Framework and the
sectoral annexures. A Concept note was shared with the identified experts from think tanks,
academia, international organisations, development finance institutions, line ministries/departments of the Government of India, and industry bodies to gather feedback
and inputs. This framework has been prepared based on the consultations and inputs received
on the initial concept note. Existing taxonomies from various countries, regions, and
organisations have also been reviewed with respect to the objectives, principles and approach.
7.2. Before finalisation, comments received through public consultation will be duly
considered. Following this, the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance will
release the Framework of India’s Climate Finance Taxonomy.
7.3. The framework document sets out the basis on which sectoral annexures will be
prepared taking into account the objectives, principles, approach and flexibilities to address
proportionality and sectoral context and pathways. In the second stage of work, the inputs
from the STCs will be finalised as annexures to the framework document.
7.4. The framework document will be reviewed periodically.