EXTRACT OF 2021 CLIMATE FINANCE JOINT REPORT ON MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANKS’ JOINT METHODOLOGY FOR TRACKING CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION FINANCE

I.

BACKGROUND AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES

1. Climate resilience and adaptation are intrinsically linked to development. This makes it
challenging to accurately estimate adaptation finance in development operations. In response
to this challenge, the joint MDB Working Group on Climate Finance Tracking developed a
common adaptation finance tracking methodology in 2012.1 This common methodology
has been applied to assessing and reporting multilateral development bank (MDB) finance
directed to specific adaptation activities2 that are carried out in response to experienced and
anticipated climate change impacts.
2. The methodology takes a context-specific, granular and conservative approach to reduce
the scope for over-reporting of adaptation finance. The MDB adaptation finance tracking
methodology requires project activities that contribute to adaptation to be disaggregated from
activities that do not.
3. The joint MDB methodology seeks to identify the links between adaptation activities and the
project’s explicit intent to reduce vulnerability to climate change. Only activities that directly
address climate change vulnerability are considered when estimating the adaptation finance.
This means that the volume of MDB-reported adaptation finance is an estimate of the finance
associated with specific project activities that contribute to adapting to climate change.
4. Multilateral development banks and members of the International Development Finance
Club (IDFC) have been working together to improve the harmonisation, comparability
and transparency of the climate finance they report. As a result of these joint efforts, the
multilateral development banks and members of the IDFC agreed on the Common Principles
for Climate Change Adaptation Finance Tracking in July 2015. The principles establish the
parameters with which to identify and estimate the volume of adaptation finance in MDB and
IDFC operations. They also form the basis for further joint work to increase the comparability
of reported figures on climate adaptation finance and to harmonise key concepts related to
reporting guidelines and processes.
5. Between 2021 and 2022, the MDBs carried out a review of the joint MDB methodology for
tracking adaptation finance, while continuing to apply both the methodology and the joint
MDB-IDFC principles. The review built on collective experiences of applying the methodology
over the preceding decade.3 It aimed to better characterise adaptation activities for the
purpose of tracking adaptation finance, and to provide guidance on the application of the joint
methodology in a broader range of financing instruments.
6. The outcome was an update to the methodology that reflected the evolving understanding
of adaptation and climate resilience and advances made in the fields of adaptation finance.
These developments include the following:
a. Adaptation is no longer viewed purely as an add-on to development investments, but
rather as an imperative for putting development on the path to resilience. As a result,
adaptation support has expanded from traditional infrastructure sectors to a wider range
of sectors, such as education, health, social protection, financial services, and research
and innovation for adaptation solutions.
b. Financing modalities supporting adaptation have broadened from the typical investment
loans and programmes to other financial instruments, including policy-based loans,
working capital and credit lines (see Figure 1).
1	 See Section 2.3 of the Joint MDB report on climate finance 2013 and subsequent joint MDB reports for details of the common MDB
methodology.
2

Under this methodology, “activities” should be understood as projects, project components, or elements or proportions of projects.

3

Lessons learned from the implementation of the common principles are available at a joint MDB-IDFC report.

Background and guiding principles | 1

c.

Relevant advances concerning green and sustainable finance have emerged in recent
years, notably the EU taxonomy for sustainable finance and impact reporting for green
bonds, introducing new concepts and approaches for better defining, reporting and
monitoring adaptation activities, including private investment in adaptation.

Figure 1: MDB adaptation finance by instrument (2012-2020)

Note: Other instruments include advisory services and bonds. Some MDBs report eligible bonds under the category of investment loans.

In addition to these developments, multilateral development banks are committed to making their
operations consistent with a pathway towards low-carbon and climate-resilient development,
in line with the goals of the Paris Agreement.4 Assessing the alignment to the Paris Agreement
and tracking adaptation finance are clearly linked, while serving different purposes. Multilateral
development banks have developed a joint methodology to assess the alignment of their operation
to the Paris Agreement. This assessment is applied at the project level and provides an effective
filter to ensure that MDB financing causes no significant harm to the abilities of communities,
economic activities and the environment to cope with physical climate risks. The adaptation
finance tracking methodology provides guidance for estimating the finance associated with the
filtered projects supporting communities, economic activities and the environment to adapt to a
changing climate.
7.

The multilateral development banks will continue to work together to enhance approaches to
tracking adaptation finance and support advances in this area. They will also continue to work
on the development of metrics that can adequately capture the effectiveness of the adaptation
activities financed through their operations, building on experience and jointly developed initial
frameworks.5

8. This annex describes the updated MDB methodology for tracking adaptation finance, clarifying
the types of activities that can contribute to adaptation. As before, the methodology is based
on a three-step process required to identify adaptation activities. The annex also clarifies how
this process can be applied to a broader range of financial instruments and provides a few
project examples.

2

4

As specified in Article 2.1(c) of the Paris Agreement.

5

A Framework and Principles for Climate Resilience Metrics in Financing Operations.

| JOINT METHODOLOGY FOR TRACKING CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION FINANCE

II. ACTIVITIES CONSIDERED FOR ADAPTATION FINANCE
9. The multilateral development banks have a wide variety of operations across different
geographical regions, economies and financing instruments. As a result, adaptation finance
tracking may take place across a range of activities categorised as follows (see Table 1):
a. T  ype 1/Activities that are adapted: Activities that integrate measures to manage physical
climate risks and ensure that the project’s intended objectives are realised despite these
risks. These activities include adjustments or improvements required to ensure that the
project performs well against experienced and anticipated impacts of climate change.
Adaptation is not the primary objective of the activity.
b.  Type 2/Activities that have shared objectives of adaptation and development: Activities
that directly reduce physical climate risk and build the adaptive capacity of the system
within which the activity takes place.6 These activities are typically identified based on
a robust understanding of physical climate risks faced by the system within which the
project takes place. These activities are themselves adjusted to cope with experienced
and anticipated impacts of climate change. Adaptation is one of the objectives of the
activity.
c.  Type 3/Activities that enable adaptation: Activities that contribute to reducing the
underlying causes of vulnerability to climate change at the systemic level and/or removing
knowledge, capacity, technological and other barriers to adaptation. This type of activity
supports adaptation beyond its immediate scope by creating enabling conditions for policy
and regulatory environment developments, physical or natural asset enhancements,
capacity strengthening, technology developments or knowledge enhancements. These
activities are themselves adjusted to cope with the experienced and anticipated impacts
of climate change. Adaptation is the primary objective of the activity.
Table 1. A summary and illustrative examples of the three types of adaptation activities
ADAPTATION ACTIVITIES
Type 1

Type 2

Type 3

Description

Activities that integrate
measures to manage physical
climate risks and ensure
that the project’s intended
objectives are realised despite
these risks

Activities that directly reduce
physical climate risk and
build the adaptive capacity of
the system within which the
activity takes place

Activities that contribute
to reducing the underlying
causes of vulnerability
to climate change at the
systemic level and/or
removing knowledge, capacity,
technological and other
barriers to adaptation

Objective

Activities that integrate
measures to manage physical
climate risks and ensure
that the project’s intended
objectives are realised despite
these risks

Activities that directly reduce
physical climate risk and
build the adaptive capacity of
the system within which the
activity takes place

Activities that contribute
to reducing the underlying
causes of vulnerability
to climate change at the
systemic level and/or
removing knowledge, capacity,
technological and other
barriers to adaptation

Adaptation finance

Less than 100% of MDB
finance on the activity

Less than 100% of MDB
finance on the activity

100% of MDB finance on the
activity

6	 The system within which the activity takes place can include the project or programme it is part of, surrounding geographic areas and
landscape, and/ or the socioeconomic entities and groups benefiting from the project.

Activities considered for adaptation finance | 3

ADAPTATION ACTIVITIES

Illustrative
examples

Type 1

Type 2

Type 3

•A
  djusted design of culverts
required in a road project
to cope with the increased
risk of extreme rainfall and
flooding

•  Cash transfer activities for
underserved and vulnerable
communities to strengthen
social protection and
improve preparedness for
and recovery from climate
shocks

•  Research and development
of crop breeds more resilient
to drought

•U
  se of conductors with
operating limits at higher
temperature thresholds in a
transmission line vulnerable
to increased extreme
temperatures

• Diversification of water
sources needed in a city’s
water supply system to meet
the increased demand of a
growing population and to
reduce risks to the water
supply system resulting from
droughts

•  Fund providing financing
to small and medium
enterprises (SMEs) to
accelerate the development,
application and transfer of
adaptation solutions
•  Levee system to protect
a region including towns,
businesses, infrastructure
and agricultural land from
the increased risk of flooding
•  Introduction of crop breeds
to increase small farmers’
resilience to drought in a
region with a high risk of
precipitation, as part of
an integrated agriculture
project

10. The MDB adaptation finance tracking methodology centres on the understanding that
adaptation is context- and location-specific. Adapting to climate change requires the use of
a process-based approach to assess climate change vulnerabilities and identify the activities
required to reduce such vulnerabilities. The following sections describe how this process based approach is applied to different financial instruments to identify adaptation activities
and estimate adaptation finance. Illustrative project examples of how the updated MDB
adaptation finance tracking methodology is applied to different financial instruments are
provided in Table A.B.1 of the full joint MDB climate finance report.
III.	 E STIMATING ADAPTATION FINANCE IN INVESTMENT AND PROGRAMME LOANS
AND GRANTS WITH KNOWN USE OF PROCEEDS
11. Investment loans and grants with known use of proceeds are financial instruments where the
project’s sectoral and geographical scope is typically known in advance.
12. In such financial instruments, the MDB methodology on adaptation finance tracking requires
the following three key steps to identify adaptation activities:
1. Setting out the project’s context of vulnerability to climate change.
2. Making an explicit statement of intent of the project to reduce the climate change
vulnerabilities identified.
3. Articulating a clear and direct link between specific project activities and the climate
change vulnerability identified in Step 1.
13. Once adaptation activities are identified in a project, adaptation finance can be estimated
using either an incremental or proportional approach. Figure 2 illustrates the process for
applying the updated MDB adaptation finance tracking methodology to investment and
programme loans and grants. The process is discussed in further detail below.

4

| JOINT METHODOLOGY FOR TRACKING CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION FINANCE

Figure 2: The multilateral development banks’ adaptation finance tracking process

Step 1: Has the context of climate change vulnerability been set out?
No
Yes
Step 2: Is there an explicit statement of intent to reduce the identified
climate change vulnerability?
No
Yes
Step 3: Is there a direct link between the project activities and the
identified climate change vulnerabilities?
No
Yes
To assess adaptation finance, the project activities that directly address identified
climate change vulnerabilities are disaggregated from other project activities

Type 1

Type 2

Type 3

Adaptation finance
less than 100%

Adaptation finance
less than 100%

Adaptation finance
100%

Activities not relevant for
climate adaptation
Adaptation finance = 0%

Step 1. Context of vulnerability to climate change
14. For an activity to be considered an adaptation activity, the context of climate change
vulnerability to experienced and anticipated impacts of climate change must first be set out
clearly using a robust evidence base. Project documents may refer to existing analyses and
reports or to original, bespoke assessments of climate change vulnerability.
15. Good practice in conducting original, bespoke analysis entails the use of information from
trusted sources, which document the vulnerability of communities, physical assets and/
or ecosystems to climate change, as well as the use of recent climate trends including any
departures from historic means. These may be combined with climate change projections
drawn from a range of climate model simulations, with high and low greenhouse gas emission
scenarios, to explore the full range of projected impacts and uncertainties. Climate projection
uncertainties should be presented and interpreted transparently. The timescale of projected
climate change impacts should match the intended lifespan of the activities being financed
through the project. For activities without clear lifespans (for example certain types of
nature-based solutions or investments in operational expenses), an appropriate timescale of
projected climate change impacts should be considered.
Step 2. Statement of intent
16. Once a project’s context of vulnerability to climate change has been established, the project
documents should set out the explicit intention to address the identified climate change
vulnerabilities. This is an important step to ensuring experienced and anticipated impacts of
climate change are considered in a project.

Estimating adaptation finance in investment and programme loans and grants with known use of proceeds | 5

17. The methodology is flexible about the way in which this intent is demonstrated, as long as the
project does not exacerbate vulnerabilities beyond the project boundary or is not inconsistent
with relevant adaptation strategies and plans such as national adaptation plans, nationally
determined contributions and long-term strategies or other relevant policy documents. For
example, the statement of intent could be reported in final technical documents, documents
for MDB board approval, internal memos or other associated project documents.
Step 3. Clear and direct link between climate change vulnerability and project activities
18. In line with the principles of the overall MDB climate finance tracking, adaptation finance
estimations consider only the finance allocated to specific project activities that are clearly
linked to the context of climate change vulnerability identified in Step 1. Therefore, where
possible, projects are disaggregated into discrete activities. Adaptation finance is attributed
only to the activities that clearly respond to the context of climate change vulnerability. Each
project activity can then be assessed as an adaptation activity or not relevant for adaptation.
When it is not possible to break a project down into activities, the project should instead be
treated as a whole.
19. Adaptation finance can be estimated using one of the following two approaches:
a.  The incremental approach estimates the additional costs associated with the activities
required to adapt the project to climate change against a hypothetical baseline where the
project would aim to deliver expected results without addressing physical climate risks.
b.  The proportional approach refers to adaptation finance estimated as a proportion of
the MDB finance that corresponds to the adaptation activities included in a project. This
may be informed by a range of credible sources including assessments of the cost of
adaptation in similar operations or expert knowledge on the relevant sectoral practice,
together with information on the assumptions and calculations used. The multilateral
development banks will continue to share and exchange knowledge on the criteria that
may be used to inform the use of the proportional approach.
20. For type 1 and type 2 activities, adaptation finance is less than 100% of the activity cost.
Adaptation finance is estimated using an incremental approach or a proportional approach.
21. For type 3 activities, adaptation finance is 100% of the activity cost because such activities
are motivated by the need to address experienced and anticipated impacts of climate change.
IV. ESTIMATING ADAPTATION FINANCE IN OTHER FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
22. Since 2012, the multilateral development banks have diversified and grown their offering of
financial products in order to serve the needs of their clients and as a result of advances in
the field of sustainable finance. In addition to financial instruments such as investment and
programme loans and grants, multilateral development banks have also increasingly provided
adaptation finance through other financing instruments such as lines of credit, guarantees,
equity, policy-based financing and results-based financing
23. This section provides an initial framework to track adaptation finance in policy-based
financing, working capital and intermediated financing. Adaptation finance attribution for
these instruments is still based on the three-step approach, which has been further clarified to
reflect the nature of these financial instruments.
24. The multilateral development banks will continue to work together and with other financial
institutions to further develop approaches for tracking adaptation finance in other financial
instruments, such as guarantees, equity and results-based financing.

6

| JOINT METHODOLOGY FOR TRACKING CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION FINANCE

Policy-based financing
25. Policy-based financing supports national and subnational programmes of policy reforms and
institutional actions that promote growth, poverty reduction and sustainable development.
Financing is made available as non-earmarked general budget financing upon satisfactory
implementation of the overall policy and institutional reform programme, which includes a set
of critical policy actions.
26. The policy actions supported through policy-based financing are defined and agreed upon
between the MDB and the recipient government in advance and are outlined in the project
documents. Policy actions may be fully dedicated to addressing climate change vulnerabilities
and contributing to climate change adaptation or may be designed to simultaneously support
other development objectives.
27. The MDB methodology on tracking adaptation finance in policy-based financing identifies
adaptation activities using the following three steps:
a.   Context of vulnerability: The operation clearly sets out the context of climate change
vulnerability using a robust evidence base, and adaptation activities that are required to
strengthen the recipient’s policy and institutional framework.
b.  Intent: The operation supports the recipient to identify policy actions that can contribute
to adaptation and sets out the explicit intention to develop such policy actions consistent
with the context of vulnerability and in line with relevant adaptation strategies and plans.
c.  Clear and direct link between climate change vulnerability context and policy actions:
The policy actions included in the MDB operation directly contribute to addressing the
identified climate change vulnerabilities and/or enabling adaptation.
28. If these three criteria are met, climate adaptation finance is estimated at the policy action level
and using a proportional approach. Adaptation finance is allocated to each policy action that
articulates a clear and direct link between the climate change vulnerability context and the
specific policy action.
Working capital
29. Working capital is finance provided by a multilateral development bank to an entity for
operational expenditures. Working capital is considered to contribute to adaptation if it leads
to, enables or supports the implementation and operation of adaptation activities.
30. The MDB methodology on tracking adaptation finance in working capital identifies adaptation
activities using the following three steps:
a. Context of vulnerability: The context of climate change vulnerability has been clearly set
out for the recipient’s business model or stakeholders of influence.
b.  Statement of intent: The recipient conducts adaptation activities, has sustainability
certifications that require practices associated with reducing climate change vulnerability,
and/or produces products or provides services that enable adaptation.
c.  Capacity of the recipient: The recipient has the institutional capacity to report on related
adaptation activities, sustainability certifications that include adaptation practices, and/or
information related to products or services that enable adaptation, or otherwise commits
to strengthen that capacity.
31. If these three criteria are met, then the adaptation finance is estimated as the finance
associated with the adaptation activities included in the business model of the recipient using
a proportional approach or incremental approach. The estimate is based on the operational
expenditures associated with the adaptation activities.

Intermediated financing
32. Intermediated financing is financing that multilateral development banks provide through
banks, non-banking financial institutions, funds or other financial intermediaries.
33. For intermediated operations, there is often high level of uncertainty on the use of proceeds
in advance. In this case, estimating adaptation finance relies on a robust understanding of
the activities that can contribute to adaptation within the geographical and sectoral scope
of the MDB transaction, and the capacity of the recipient to utilise this information to scope,
implement and monitor these activities.
34. When the use of proceeds is defined, the MDB methodology on tracking adaptation finance in
intermediated financing identifies adaptation activities using the following three criteria:
a. Context of vulnerability: The recipient has an understanding of climate change
vulnerabilities and adaptation activities within the geographical and sectoral scope of
the MDB transaction, based on existing national/regional/local adaptation plans, other
relevant information sources or an assessment developed by the multilateral development
bank.
b.  Statement of intent: The recipient has a preliminary project pipeline or an initial list of
activities covering the scope of the MDB transaction. In the event such a pipeline does
not exist, the intermediary undertakes to develop and deliver such a pipeline. In both
cases, such a pipeline contributes to reducing climate change vulnerabilities and does not
undermine relevant adaptation strategies and plans. This commitment is reflected in the
financing agreement and is realised by the time the MDB finance is fully utilised.
c.  Capacity of the recipient: The recipient has the institutional capacity to identify and report
on adaptation activities, or otherwise commits to strengthen that capacity. Evidence of
this capacity could include dedicated responsibility for climate change adaptation, a
climate risk management system, the disclosure of physical climate risk, or other evidence
of processes that can support the identification of physical climate risk and adaptation
activities.
35. If these three criteria are met, the multilateral development bank may determine the
adaptation finance as follows:
a. When the use of proceeds is known, adaptation finance is estimated as the percentage of
finance associated with adaptation activities included in the initial project pipeline.
b. When the use of proceeds is undefined — for example if a project pipeline is still being
developed at the time of project approval or in the case of a general credit line — the
multilateral development bank may estimate adaptation finance using a projected
allocation to activities that contribute to adaptation, as committed in the financing
agreement. The projected allocation can be based on the percentage of the recipient’s
existing investment portfolio financing adaptation activities at the moment of the MDB’s
transaction, a client survey or a market assessment. The multilateral development bank
will periodically verify actual disbursements to inform future similar operations.
