Common Principles for
Climate Change
Adaptation Finance
Tracking
30/11/2023

*OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Preamble
The Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) 1 and the International Development
Finance Club (IDFC) 2 are fully committed to promoting and supporting climate-resilient
development, as an essential element of the sustainability of their investments, by
integrating climate adaptation and resilience into their operations and initiatives. This
may encompass support at the national, territorial, local or project level to prepare for,
adapt and respond to the impacts of climate change.
Climate adaptation and resilience are intrinsically linked to development. This may
make it challenging to accurately estimate adaptation finance in development
operations. Recognizing the challenges and the need for comparable approaches,
MDBs and IDFC have been working together to improve the harmonisation,
comparability and transparency of the climate finance.

The IDFC-MDB Common Principles for Climate Change
Adaptation Finance Tracking
In 2015, the MDBs, who jointly report on Climate Finance, and the IDFC agreed on a
set of common principles for climate change adaptation finance tracking (the Common
Principles) as an essential and important first step to improve the reporting on
adaptation finance (see Annex I the Common Principles as endorsed). These
principles defined the context of adaptation finance in development and outlined a
common approach for tracking adaptation finance. They also provided the basis for
further joint work that would improve transparency in adaptation finance reporting, and
address comparability of the reporting process and relevant process-based concepts
and guidelines.

Updated joint MDB Methodology for Climate Change
Adaptation Finance Tracking
Since the adoption of the Common Principles in 2015, the MDBs and the IDFCs have
worked together to enhance the understanding of adaptation activities and climate
adaptation finance. Following the launch of the updated MDBs’ Joint Methodology for
Tracking Climate Change Adaptation Finance (the joint MDB Methodology) in
November 2022, IDFC and MDBs have further exchanged knowledge and experience
on financing adaptation activities on this new methodology, which draws on initial
common principles, enhancing their operational application. Following this knowledge
exchange, the IDFC adopted the joint MDB Methodology in October 2023. As a result,
MDBs and IDFC have issued this update on the Common Principles. Operational
Application of the Common Principles

1 The African Development Bank (AfDB); the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the Asian Infrastructure

Investment Bank (AIIB); the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD); the
European Investment Bank (EIB); the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB); and the International
Finance Corporation (IFC) and World Bank (IDA/IBRD) from the World Bank Group (WBG)
2 see www.idfc.org

Operational Application of the Common Principles
The MDBs and IDFC have agreed to adopt the joint MDB Methodology as the
operational application of the Common Principles. The MDBs will apply the joint MDB
Methodology from the 2023 portfolio according to their respective fiscal years, which
will be reported in the joint MDBs climate finance report released in 2024, and by the
IDFC in the 2026 portfolio, which will reported in the Green Finance Mapping in 2027.
The joint MDB Methodology is enclosed in Annex II.
The MDBs and IDFC invite other institutions to adopt the joint MDB Methodology for
Tracking Adaptation Finance, and therewith further increase consistency,
transparency and credibility of adaptation finance reporting.
As an inherent and important part of improving climate change adaptation finance
tracking, the MDBs and IDFC are committed to continuing to work together,
maintaining an open and transparent exchange of information around institutional
experience and learning, as well as to jointly discuss potential proposals to improve
the Common Principles.

Moving forward
Building on the joint efforts to date and guided by the Common Principles, the MDBs
and members of IDFC shall continue to
 Share and exchange experience on supporting adaptation and applying the Joint
Methodology for Tracking Climate Change Adaptation Finance, thereby increasing
capacity and knowledge on the topic. This shared knowledge will inform the review
and update of and further improve the tracking of climate change adaptation
finance;
 Advance understanding on the application of the methodology, taking note of user
needs, with the aim of providing increased transparency on areas where
differences in tracking approaches continue to exist with a particular focus on
further refining definitions for adaptation activities and the process of
disaggregation in adaptation finance.
 Develop and collate good practice on topics that will add clarity and substance, for
example in guidelines on the key steps for adaptation tracking; good practice in
climate vulnerability assessments; avoidance of maladaptation; adaptation
decision pathways; and the importance of capacity building.

Annex I IDFC-MDB Common Principles on Adaptation Finance Tracking








Adaptation finance tracking relates to tracking the finance for activities that
address current and expected effects of climate change, where such effects
are material for the context of those activities.3
Adaptation finance tracking may relate to activities consisting of stand-alone
projects, multiple projects under larger programs, or project components, subcomponents or elements, including those financed through financial
intermediaries.
Adaptation finance tracking process consists of the following key steps:
o Setting out the context of risks, vulnerabilities and impacts related to
climate variability and climate change;
o Stating the intent to address the identified risks, vulnerabilities and
impacts in project documentation;
o Demonstrating a direct link between the identified risks, vulnerabilities
and impacts, and the financed activities.
Adaptation finance tracking requires adaptation activities to be disaggregated
from non-adaptation activities as far as reasonably possible. If disaggregation
is not possible using project specific data, a more qualitative or experiencebased assessment can be used to identify the proportion of the project that
covers climate change adaptation activities. In consistence with the principle
of conservativeness, climate finance is underreported rather than overreported in this case.

Annex II – Updated MDB Joint Methodology for Climate Change Adaptation
Finance Tracking
I. BACKGROUND AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES
1. Climate resilience and adaptation are intrinsically linked to development. This makes
it challenging to accurately estimate adaptation finance in development operations.
In response to this challenge, the joint MDB Working Group on Climate Finance
Tracking developed a common adaptation finance tracking methodology in
20124.This common methodology has been applied to assessing and reporting
multilateral development bank (MDB) finance directed to specific adaptation

3

The purpose of this Principle is to frame the space of activities that can be classified as
adaptation finance tracking in the context of MDB and IDFC developmental work. As such, it
recognizes the existence of differing scientific and institutional definitions of adaptation to climate
change and does not attempt to define adaptation to climate change in a wider global context e.g.
whether to include adaptation to current climate variability or not. However, as a next step the
joint MDB and IDFC group will work on further refinement of definitions for adaptation activities in
the context of adaptation finance tracking.
4 See Section 2.3 of the Joint MDB report on climate finance 2013 and subsequent joint MDB
reports for details of the common MDB methodology.

1

activities5 that are carried out in response to experienced and anticipated climate
change impacts.
2. The methodology takes a context-specific, granular and conservative approach to
reduce the scope for over-reporting of adaptation finance. The MDB adaptation
finance tracking methodology requires project activities that contribute to
adaptation to be disaggregated from activities that do not.
3. The joint MDB methodology seeks to identify the links between adaptation activities
and the project’s explicit intent to reduce vulnerability to climate change. Only
activities that directly address climate change vulnerability are considered when
estimating the adaptation finance. This means that the volume of MDB-reported
adaptation finance is an estimate of the finance associated with specific project
activities that contribute to adapting to climate change.
4. Multilateral development banks and members of the International Development
Finance Club (IDFC) have been working together to improve the harmonisation,
comparability and transparency of the climate finance they report. As a result of
these joint efforts, the multilateral development banks and members of the IDFC
agreed on the Common Principles for Climate Change Adaptation Finance Tracking
in July 2015. The principles establish the parameters with which to identify and
estimate the volume of adaptation finance in MDB and IDFC operations. They also
form the basis for further joint work to increase the comparability of reported
figures on climate adaptation finance and to harmonise key concepts related to
reporting guidelines and processes.
5. Between 2021 and 2022, the MDBs carried out a review of the joint MDB
methodology for tracking adaptation finance, while continuing to apply both the
methodology and the joint MDB-IDFC principles. The review built on collective
experiences of applying the methodology over the preceding decade.6 It aimed to
better characterise adaptation activities for the purpose of tracking adaptation
finance, and to provide guidance on the application of the joint methodology in a
broader range of financing instruments.
6. The outcome was an update to the methodology that reflected the evolving
understanding of adaptation and climate resilience and advances made in the fields
of adaptation finance. These developments include the following:
a. Adaptation is no longer viewed purely as an add-on to development
investments, but rather as an imperative for putting development on the path
to resilience. As a result, adaptation support has expanded from traditional
infrastructure sectors to a wider range of sectors, such as education, health,
social protection, financial services, and research and innovation for adaptation
solutions.

5 Under this methodology, “activities” should be understood as projects, project components, or

elements or proportions of projects.
6 Lessons learned from the implementation of the common principles are available at a joint
MDB-IDFC report.

2

b. Financing modalities supporting adaptation have broadened from the typical
investment loans and programmes to other financial instruments, including
policy-based loans, working capital and credit lines
c. Relevant advances concerning green and sustainable finance have emerged in
recent years, notably the EU taxonomy for sustainable finance and impact
reporting for green bonds, introducing new concepts and approaches for better
defining, reporting and monitoring adaptation activities, including private
investment in adaptation.
In addition to these developments, multilateral development banks are committed to
making their operations consistent with a pathway towards low-carbon and climateresilient development, in line with the goals of the Paris Agreement.7 Assessing the
alignment to the Paris Agreement and tracking adaptation finance are clearly linked,
while serving different purposes. Multilateral development banks have developed a
joint methodology to assess the alignment of their operation to the Paris Agreement.
This assessment is applied at the project level and provides an effective filter to ensure
that MDB financing causes no significant harm to the abilities of communities, economic
activities and the environment to cope with physical climate risks. The adaptation
finance tracking methodology provides guidance for estimating the finance associated
with the filtered projects supporting communities, economic activities and the
environment to adapt to a changing climate.
7. The multilateral development banks will continue to work together to enhance
approaches to tracking adaptation finance and support advances in this area. They
will also continue to work on the development of metrics that can adequately
capture the effectiveness of the adaptation activities financed through their
operations, building on experience and jointly developed initial frameworks. 8
8. This annex describes the updated MDB methodology for tracking adaptation
finance, clarifying the types of activities that can contribute to adaptation. As before,
the methodology is based on a three-step process required to identify adaptation
activities (see Annex I).

II. ACTIVITIES CONSIDERED FOR ADAPTATION FINANCE
9. The multilateral development banks have a wide variety of operations across
different geographical regions, economies and financing instruments. As a result,
adaptation finance tracking may take place across a range of activities categorised
as follows (see Table 1):
a. Type 1/Activities that are adapted: Activities that integrate measures to
manage physical climate risks and ensure that the project’s intended objectives

7 As specified in Article 2.1(c) of the Paris Agreement.
8 A Framework and Principles for Climate Resilience Metrics in Financing Operations.

3

are realised despite these risks. These activities include adjustments or
improvements required to ensure that the project performs well against
experienced and anticipated impacts of climate change. Adaptation is not the
primary objective of the activity.
b. Type 2/Activities that have shared objectives of adaptation and development:
Activities that directly reduce physical climate risk and build the adaptive
capacity of the system within which the activity takes place.9These activities are
typically identified based on a robust understanding of physical climate risks
faced by the system within which the project takes place. These activities are
themselves adjusted to cope with experienced and anticipated impacts of
climate change. Adaptation is one of the objectives of the activity.
c. Type 3/Activities that enable adaptation: Activities that contribute to reducing
the underlying causes of vulnerability to climate change at the systemic level
and/or removing knowledge, capacity, technological and other barriers to
adaptation. This type of activity supports adaptation beyond its immediate scope
by creating enabling conditions for policy and regulatory environment
developments, physical or natural asset enhancements, capacity strengthening,
technology developments or knowledge enhancements. These activities are
themselves adjusted to cope with the experienced and anticipated impacts of
climate change. Adaptation is the primary objective of the activity.
Table 1. A summary of the three types of adaptation activities
ADAPTATION ACTIVITIES
Type 1

Type 2

Type 3

Description

Activities that
integrate
measures to
manage physical
climate risks and
ensure that the
project’s intended
objectives are
realised despite
these risks

Activities that
directly reduce
physical climate
risk and build the
adaptive capacity
of the system
within which the
activity takes place

Activities that
contribute to
reducing the
underlying causes
of vulnerability to
climate change at
the systemic level
and/or removing
knowledge,
capacity,
technological and
other barriers to
adaptation

Objective

Activities that
integrate
measures to

Activities that
directly reduce
physical climate

Activities that
contribute to
reducing the

9 The system within which the activity takes place can include the project or programme it is part

of, surrounding geographic areas and landscape, and/ or the socioeconomic entities and groups
benefiting from the project.

4

manage physical
climate risks and
ensure that the
project’s intended
objectives are
realised despite
these risks

risk and build the
adaptive capacity
of the system
within which the
activity takes place

underlying causes
of vulnerability to
climate change at
the systemic level
and/or removing
knowledge,
capacity,
technological and
other barriers to
adaptation

Adaptation finance Less than 100% of
MDB finance on
the activity

Less than 100% of
MDB finance on
the activity

100% of MDB
finance on the
activity

10. The MDB adaptation finance tracking methodology centres on the understanding
that adaptation is context- and location-specific. Adapting to climate change
requires the use of a process-based approach to assess climate change
vulnerabilities and identify the activities required to reduce such vulnerabilities. The
following sections describe how this process-based approach is applied to different
financial instruments to identify adaptation activities and estimate adaptation
finance.
III. ESTIMATING ADAPTATION FINANCE IN INVESTMENT AND PROGRAMME LOANS
AND GRANTS WITH KNOWN USE OF PROCEEDS
11. Investment loans and grants with known use of proceeds are financial instruments
where the project’s sectoral and geographical scope is typically known in advance.
12. In such financial instruments, the MDB methodology on adaptation finance tracking
requires the following three key steps to identify adaptation activities:
1. Setting out the project’s context of vulnerability to climate change.
2. Making an explicit statement of intent of the project to reduce the climate
change vulnerabilities identified.
3. Articulating a clear and direct link between specific project activities and the
climate change vulnerability identified in Step 1.
13. Once adaptation activities are identified in a project, adaptation finance can be
estimated using either an incremental or proportional approach. Figure 1 illustrates
the process for applying the updated MDB adaptation finance tracking methodology
to investment and programme loans and grants. The process is discussed in further
detail below.

5

Figure 1: The multilateral development banks’ adaptation finance tracking process

Step 1. Context of vulnerability to climate change
14. For an activity to be considered an adaptation activity, the context of climate change
vulnerability to experienced and anticipated impacts of climate change must first be
set out clearly using a robust evidence base. Project documents may refer to existing
analyses and reports or to original, bespoke assessments of climate change
vulnerability.
15. Good practice in conducting original, bespoke analysis entails the use of information
from trusted sources, which document the vulnerability of communities, physical
assets and/or ecosystems to climate change, as well as the use of recent climate
trends including any departures from historic means. These may be combined with
climate change projections drawn from a range of climate model simulations, with
high and low greenhouse gas emission scenarios, to explore the full range of
projected impacts and uncertainties. Climate projection uncertainties should be
presented and interpreted transparently. The timescale of projected climate change
impacts should match the intended lifespan of the activities being financed through
the project. For activities without clear lifespans (for example certain types of
nature-based solutions or investments in operational expenses), an appropriate
timescale of projected climate change impacts should be considered.

6

Step 2. Statement of intent
16. Once a project’s context of vulnerability to climate change has been established, the
project documents should set out the explicit intention to address the identified
climate change vulnerabilities. This is an important step to ensuring experienced and
anticipated impacts of climate change are considered in a project.
17. The methodology is flexible about the way in which this intent is demonstrated, as
long as the project does not exacerbate vulnerabilities beyond the project boundary
or is not inconsistent with relevant adaptation strategies and plans such as national
adaptation plans, nationally determined contributions and long-term strategies or
other relevant policy documents. For example, the statement of intent could be
reported in final technical documents, documents for MDB board approval, internal
memos or other associated project documents.
Step 3. Clear and direct link between climate change vulnerability and project
activities
18. In line with the principles of the overall MDB climate finance tracking, adaptation
finance estimations consider only the finance allocated to specific project activities
that are clearly linked to the context of climate change vulnerability identified in
Step 1. Therefore, where possible, projects are disaggregated into discrete activities.
Adaptation finance is attributed only to the activities that clearly respond to the
context of climate change vulnerability. Each project activity can then be assessed
as an adaptation activity or not relevant for adaptation. When it is not possible to
break a project down into activities, the project should instead be treated as a
whole.
19. Adaptation finance can be estimated using one of the following two approaches:
a. The incremental approach estimates the additional costs associated with the
activities required to adapt the project to climate change against a hypothetical
baseline where the project would aim to deliver expected results without
addressing physical climate risks.
b. The proportional approach refers to adaptation finance estimated as a
proportion of the MDB finance that corresponds to the adaptation activities
included in a project. This may be informed by a range of credible sources
including assessments of the cost of adaptation in similar operations or expert
knowledge on the relevant sectoral practice, together with information on the
assumptions and calculations used. The multilateral development banks will
continue to share and exchange knowledge on the criteria that may be used to
inform the use of the proportional approach.
20. For type 1 and type 2 activities, adaptation finance is less than 100% of the activity
cost. Adaptation finance is estimated using an incremental approach or a
proportional approach.
21. For type 3 activities, adaptation finance is 100% of the activity cost because such
activities are motivated by the need to address experienced and anticipated impacts
of climate change.

7

IV. ESTIMATING ADAPTATION FINANCE IN OTHER FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
22. Since 2012, the multilateral development banks have diversified and grown their
offering of financial products in order to serve the needs of their clients and as a
result of advances in the field of sustainable finance. In addition to financial
instruments such as investment and programme loans and grants, multilateral
development banks have also increasingly provided adaptation finance through
other financing instruments such as lines of credit, guarantees, equity, policy-based
financing and results-based financing
23. This section provides an initial framework to track adaptation finance in policy-based
financing, working capital and intermediated financing. Adaptation finance
attribution for these instruments is still based on the three-step approach, which has
been further clarified to reflect the nature of these financial instruments.
24. The multilateral development banks will continue to work together and with other
financial institutions to further develop approaches for tracking adaptation finance
in other financial instruments, such as guarantees, equity and results-based
financing.
Policy-based financing
25. Policy-based financing supports national and subnational programmes of policy
reforms and institutional actions that promote growth, poverty reduction and
sustainable development. Financing is made available as non-earmarked general
budget financing upon satisfactory implementation of the overall policy and
institutional reform programme, which includes a set of critical policy actions.
26. The policy actions supported through policy-based financing are defined and agreed
upon between the MDB and the recipient government in advance and are outlined
in the project documents. Policy actions may be fully dedicated to addressing climate
change vulnerabilities and contributing to climate change adaptation or may be
designed to simultaneously support other development objectives.
27. The MDB methodology on tracking adaptation finance in policy-based financing
identifies adaptation activities using the following three steps:
a. Context of vulnerability: The operation clearly sets out the context of climate
change vulnerability using a robust evidence base, and adaptation activities that
are required to strengthen the recipient’s policy and institutional framework.
b. Intent: The operation supports the recipient to identify policy actions that can
contribute to adaptation and sets out the explicit intention to develop such
policy actions consistent with the context of vulnerability and in line with
relevant adaptation strategies and plans.
c. Clear and direct link between climate change vulnerability context and policy
actions: The policy actions included in the MDB operation directly contribute to
addressing the identified climate change vulnerabilities and/or enabling
adaptation.

8

28. If these three criteria are met, climate adaptation finance is estimated at the policy
action level and using a proportional approach. Adaptation finance is allocated to
each policy action that articulates a clear and direct link between the climate change
vulnerability context and the specific policy action.
Working capital
29. Working capital is finance provided by a multilateral development bankto an entity
for operational expenditures. Working capital is considered to contribute to
adaptation if it leads to, enables or supports the implementation and operation of
adaptation activities.
30. The MDB methodology on tracking adaptation finance in working capital identifies
adaptation activities using the following three steps:
a. Context of vulnerability: The context of climate change vulnerability has been
clearly set out for the recipient’s business model or stakeholders of influence.
b. Statement of intent: The recipient conducts adaptation activities, has
sustainability certifications that require practices associated with reducing
climate change vulnerability, and/or produces products or provides services that
enable adaptation.
c. Capacity of the recipient: The recipient has the institutional capacity to report
on related adaptation activities, sustainability certifications that include
adaptation practices, and/or information related to products or services that
enable adaptation, or otherwise commits to strengthen that capacity.
31. If these three criteria are met, then the adaptation finance is estimated as the
finance associated with the adaptation activities included in the business model of
the recipient using a proportional approach or incremental approach. The estimate
is based on the operational expenditures associated with the adaptation activities.
Intermediated financing
32. Intermediated financing is financing that multilateral development banks provide
through banks, non-banking financial institutions, funds or other financial
intermediaries.
33. For intermediated operations, there is often high level of uncertainty on the use of
proceeds in advance. In this case, estimating adaptation finance relies on a robust
understanding of the activities that can contribute to adaptation within the
geographical and sectoral scope of the MDB transaction, and the capacity of the
recipient to utilise this information to scope, implement and monitor these
activities.
34. When the use of proceeds is defined, the MDB methodology on tracking adaptation
finance in intermediated financing identifies adaptation activities using the following
three criteria:

9

a. Context of vulnerability: The recipient has an understanding of climate change
vulnerabilities and adaptation activities within the geographical and sectoral
scope of the MDB transaction, based on existing national/regional/local
adaptation plans, other relevant information sources or an assessment
developed by the multilateral development bank.
b. Statement of intent: The recipient has a preliminary project pipeline or an
initial list of activities covering the scope of the MDB transaction. In the event
such a pipeline does not exist, the intermediary undertakes to develop and
deliver such a pipeline. In both cases, such a pipeline contributes to reducing
climate change vulnerabilities and does not undermine relevant adaptation
strategies and plans. This commitment is reflected in the financing agreement
and is realised by the time the MDB finance is fully utilised.
c. Capacity of the recipient: The recipient has the institutional capacity to identify
and report on adaptation activities, or otherwise commits to strengthen that
capacity. Evidence of this capacity could include dedicated responsibility for
climate change adaptation, a climate risk management system, the disclosure of
physical climate risk, or other evidence of processes that can support the
identification of physical climate risk and adaptation activities.
35. If these three criteria are met, the multilateral development bank may determine
the adaptation finance as follows:
a. When the use of proceeds is known, adaptation finance is estimated as the
percentage of finance associated with adaptation activities included in the
initial project pipeline.
b. When the use of proceeds is undefined — for example if a project pipeline is
still being developed at the time of project approval or in the case of a
general credit line — the multilateral development bank may estimate
adaptation finance using a projected allocation to activities that contribute
to adaptation, as committed in the financing agreement. The projected
allocation can be based on the percentage of the recipient’s existing
investment portfolio financing adaptation activities at the moment of the
MDB’s transaction, a client survey or a market assessment. The multilateral
development bank will periodically verify actual disbursements to inform
future similar operations.

10

www.idfc.org
secretariat_idfc@afd.fr

11

