OECD DAC Rio Markers for Climate
Handbook

OECD DAC RIO MARKERS FOR CLIMATE: HANDBOOK

1

BACKGROUND

The OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC) gathers on an annual basis statistics on official
development assistance (ODA) and other resource flows to developing countries from bilateral and
multilateral development co-operation providers. The data are publicly available in the Creditor
Reporting System (CRS) database.
Since 1998, the DAC has monitored development finance flows targeting the objectives of the Rio
Conventions on biodiversity, climate change and desertification through the CRS using the so-called “Rio
markers”. The Rio markers were originally designed to help members with the preparation of their
National Communications or National Reports to the Rio Conventions, by identifying activities that
mainstream the Conventions’ objectives into development co-operation. DAC members are requested to
indicate for each development finance activity if the activity targets environmental objectives. The Rio
markers on biodiversity, climate change mitigation and desertification were introduced in 1998, with a
fourth marker on climate change adaptation being applied to 2010 flows onwards.
Rio markers should be applied to all bilateral ODA and non-export credit other official flows (OOF)1,
excluding general budget support, imputed student costs, debt relief except debt swaps, administrative
costs, development awareness and refugees in donor countries. Multilateral contributions should not be
marked by members individually; instead international organisations report on the actual allocation of
their funds (“multilateral outflows”) and the climate-related share of their portfolio is determined on that
basis.2 This document sets out the agreed definitions and reporting instructions for the providers of
finance.
Further details on the methodology, background information, training materials and related
resources are all available online. Additional information on the Rio markers on climate change mitigation
and adaptation includes activity level project data, webinars on how to use and access the climate
markers as well as a link to a visualization portal.

1.

Applying the Rio markers to OOF is voluntary. The DAC statistical system is introducing the collection on amounts
mobilised from the private sector by official interventions. Once in place (2017 reporting on 2016 data), the Rio
markers will also apply to the private amounts mobilised.

2.

To ensure consistency in reporting, members do not individually mark their multilateral contributions. Instead the
international organisations apply the Rio markers to their outflows, or in the case of Multilateral Development Banks
(MDBs), report on components, elements or proportions of climate finance based on the Joint MDB reporting
approach. This information is subsequently used to estimate members’ contributions to climate through multilateral
organisations (“imputed multilateral contributions”).

OECD DAC RIO MARKERS FOR CLIMATE: HANDBOOK

2

DEFINITION OF THE CLIMATE CHANGE MITIGATION AND ADAPTATION MARKERS

Climate change mitigation marker
AID TARGETING THE OBJECTIVES OF THE FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE
Climate Change Mitigation
DEFINITION
An activity should be classified as
climate-change-mitigation
related (score Principal or
Significant) if:

It contributes to the objective of stabilisation of greenhouse gas (GHG)
concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous
anthropogenic interference with the climate system by promoting efforts to
reduce or limit GHG emissions or to enhance GHG sequestration.

CRITERIA
FOR ELIGIBILITY

The activity contributes to
a) the mitigation of climate change by limiting anthropogenic emissions of
GHGs, including gases regulated by the Montreal Protocol; or
b) the protection and/or enhancement of GHG sinks and reservoirs; or
c) the integration of climate change concerns with the recipient countries’
development objectives through institution building, capacity development,
strengthening the regulatory and policy framework, or research; or
d) developing countries’ efforts to meet their obligations under the
Convention.
The activity will score “principal objective” if it directly and explicitly aims to
achieve one or more of the above four criteria.

See the indicative table for guidance on Rio marking by sector/subsector and examples of qualifying
activities.

OECD DAC RIO MARKERS FOR CLIMATE: HANDBOOK

3

Climate change adaptation marker
AID TARGETING THE OBJECTIVES OF THE FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE
Climate Change Adaptation
DEFINITION
An activity should be classified
as adaptation-related (score
Principal or Significant) if:

It intends to reduce the vulnerability of human or natural systems to the
current and expected impacts of climate change, including climate variability,
by maintaining or increasing resilience, through increased ability to adapt to,
or absorb, climate change stresses, shocks and variability and/or by helping
reduce exposure to them.
This encompasses a range of activities from information and knowledge
generation, to capacity development, planning and the implementation of
climate change adaptation actions.

CRITERIA
FOR ELIGIBILITY
An activity is eligible for the
climate change adaptation
marker if:

a)
b)

the climate change adaptation objective is explicitly indicated in the
activity documentation; and
the activity contains specific measures targeting the definition above.

Carrying out an assessment of vulnerability to climate variability and change,
either separately or as an integral part of agencies’ standard procedures,
facilitates this approach.
To guide scoring, a three-step approach is recommended as a “best practice”,
in particular to justify for a principal score:
 Setting out the context of risks, vulnerabilities and impacts related to
climate variability and climate change: for a project to be considered as
one that contributes to adaptation to climate change, the context of
climate vulnerability should be set out clearly using a robust evidence
base. This could take a variety of forms, including use of material from
existing analyses and reports, or original, bespoke climate vulnerability
assessment analysis carried out as part of the preparation of a project.
 Stating the intent to address the identified risks, vulnerabilities and
impacts in project documentation: The project should set out how it
intends to address the context- and location- specific climate change
vulnerabilities, as set out in existing analyses, reports or the project’s
climate vulnerability assessment.
 Demonstrating a clear and direct link between the identified risks,
vulnerabilities and impacts and the specific project activities: the project
should explicitly address risk and vulnerabilities under current and future
climate change as identified in the project documentation.

See the indicative table for guidance on Rio marking by sector/subsector and examples of qualifying
activities.

OECD DAC RIO MARKERS FOR CLIMATE: HANDBOOK

4

SCORING SYSTEM FOR CLIMATE MARKERS

A scoring system of three values is used, in which official development finance activities reported to
the DAC CRS are screened and “marked” as either (i) targeting the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) as a principal objective (score “2”); (ii) as a significant objective (score “1”);
or (iii) not targeting the Convention (score “0”). These marks indicate the policy objectives of members’
development finance activities:


An activity can be marked as principal when the objective (climate change mitigation or
adaptation) is explicitly stated as fundamental in the design of, or the motivation for, the
activity. Promoting the objective will thus be stated in the activity documentation as one of the
principal reasons for undertaking it. In other words, the activity would not have been funded (or
designed that way) but for that objective.



An activity can be marked as significant when the objective (climate change mitigation or
adaptation) is explicitly stated but it is not the fundamental driver or motivation for undertaking
it. Instead, the activity has other prime objectives but it has been formulated or adjusted to help
meet the relevant climate concerns.



The score “0” means that the activity was examined but found not to target the objective
(climate change mitigation or adaptation) in any significant way. For activities that have not
been assessed, the marker field should be left empty. This ensures that there is no confusion
between activities that do not target the objective (score = “0”), and activities for which the
answer is not known (score = “null”). This important distinction has implications for statistical
presentations of Rio marker data.

The emphasis of the markers is on the objective pursued in providing support for the activity in
question, as described in the activity documentation i.e. primarily the written material which forms the
basis for the agreement to provide funding. This may be the actual project or programme document, or a
proposal for funding an action which is outlined in a partner country document such as a national
development strategy, a sectoral strategy or climate change strategy.
To facilitate transparency, it is important that in the description of activities reported to the CRS, the
relationship between the activity and the objective (e.g. climate change mitigation/adaptation) is clearly
communicated and made explicit. This is particularly important for activities with a principal objective
score and for very large activities (recognising the administrative constraint this implies when numerous
small activities are concerned).
The following decision tree helps identify for which score a given activity qualifies.

OECD DAC RIO MARKERS FOR CLIMATE: HANDBOOK

5

Decision tree for scoring an activity against a Rio marker

*Assigning a double principal score (e.g. to both mitigation and adaptation) to the same activity should be
considered only upon explicit justification.

Qualitative methodology allowing an approximate quantification of finance flows
By identifying activities targeting climate change as a principal or significant objective, the markers
provide an indication of the degree of mainstreaming of environmental considerations into development
co-operation portfolios. The Rio markers apply to activities as a whole, and, in marking the full value of
the activities the markers are considered descriptive rather than strictly quantitative. Instead, they allow
for an approximate quantification of development finance flows that target the Rio Convention
objectives. In OECD presentations of the Rio markers, figures illustrating flows targeting objectives as
principal or significant are shown separately; the sum of the two scores is referred to as the “total” or
“upper bound” of environmental-related development finance.
Mainstreaming and the integration of environmental concerns into development co-operation
If mainstreaming is systematically practiced, the UNFCCC objectives will be integrated into projects
across a wide range of sectors, represented by a significant objective score. However, mainstreaming can
in some cases transform the activity to the point that climate change mitigation and/or adaptation
become the principal objective. For example, if the process of mainstreaming climate change into a
traditional power project results in the project being redesigned so that it instead relies on renewable
energy and energy savings, the entire activity can be considered as having climate change mitigation as

OECD DAC RIO MARKERS FOR CLIMATE: HANDBOOK

6

its principal objective. If the mainstreaming of the UNFCCC objectives is extremely limited (with regard to
the overall scope of the activity), and/or so superficial (vague declaration of intent), it should be marked
as “not targeted”.
Activities that facilitate mainstreaming can also qualify for a principal score. For example, an activity
that is primarily designed to build capacity and develop tools to integrate climate change into national
and sub-national policies, planning and investment frameworks, should obtain the principal objective
score.
Activities arising from a national action plan linked to the Rio Convention
The Rio Conventions call upon Parties to formulate action plans or strategies to implement the
objectives of the Conventions. A climate change mitigation and/or adaptation activity arising from such
an action plan or strategy (e.g., NAPAs, NAPs, NAMAs or NDCs3 under the UNFCCC) automatically qualifies
as principal objective score, as the Convention provides the motivation for the design of the activity.
Targeting multiple environmental objectives and overlaps between Rio markers
The causes and solutions to global environmental issues under the Rio Conventions and other local
environmental concerns are intertwined. The Rio Conventions often complement and reinforce each
other, and consequently it is possible that the same activity, policy or measure simultaneously addresses
climate change, biodiversity and/or desertification objectives. An activity may target multiple objectives
and qualify for more than one Rio marker.
For example, a sustainable forest management project can contribute to biodiversity conservation,
to capturing carbon (climate change mitigation) and to reducing climate risk (climate change adaptation).
In drylands such a project can also help to combat desertification. However, not all score combinations
are equally meaningful and assigning a double principal score (e.g. to both mitigation and adaptation) to
the same activity should therefore be considered only upon explicit justification.
Noting that activities may qualify for more than one Rio marker, this needs to be taken into account
when aggregating data across the markers. To avoid double or triple-counting the same activity,
aggregate figures for biodiversity, climate change mitigation, climate change adaptation and
desertification-related development finance should not be added up. Statistical presentations should
either be prepared for one marker at a time (without adding up the resulting totals) or the overlap should
be presented and treated to avoid double counting4.

3.

National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPAs); National Adaptation Plans (NAPs); Nationally Appropriate
Mitigation Actions (NAMAs); Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs).

4.

Detailed information on how to treat overlap can be found in the Rio marker webpage oe.cd/RioMarkers.

OECD DAC RIO MARKERS FOR CLIMATE: HANDBOOK

7

USE OF CLIMATE MARKERS FOR REPORTING TO THE UNITED NATIONS FRAMEWORK CONVENTION FOR
CLIMATE CHANGE (UNFCCC)

The majority of OECD DAC members draw on the Rio markers when reporting internationally on
environment-related development finance. However, the figures that can be derived from the Rio
markers are not always identical to those reported to the Conventions. This reflects the fact that the Rio
markers were originally intended to track the mainstreaming of environmental considerations into
development co-operation rather than quantify finance flows. For example, when reporting to the
UNFCCC on finance provided in National Communications, National Reports or Biennial Reports, some
members use the Rio marker data as a basis to which they apply additional quantitative methodologies,
for example in the form of coefficients. Whilst the majority of DAC members report 100% of finance
marked principal, many only account for a certain share of finance targeting climate change as a
significant objective. These shares vary (from 0-100%), and there is currently no common reporting
standard. In some cases there is also limited transparency on the evidence base supporting the approach
chosen. Other differences in reporting to the Rio conventions may also arise. For example, whether the
commitment or disbursement data is reported, or differences in geographical scope.

OECD DAC RIO MARKERS FOR CLIMATE: HANDBOOK

8

REPORTING FORMS AND EXAMPLES

Reporting form
Reporting on the Rio markers takes place at activity level, through a common format: the CRS reporting
form. Each variable of the CRS is defined in the DAC Statistical Reporting Directives, which also provides
for standardised classifications of sectors, types of finance, recipients, channels of delivery etc. The form
is partly illustrated below.
43b.
43c.
Policy objectives
20.
Gender equality………………...........
21.
Aid to environment………………….
22
PD/GG………………………………
23.
Trade development………………….

_
_
_
_

Type-of-aid related fields
24.
Free-standing technical co-operation
25.
Programme-based approach………...
26.
Investment…………………………...
27.
Associated financing………………...

_
_
_
_

Rio markers
28.
Biodiversity………………………….
29.
Climate change – mitigation………...
30.
Climate change – adaptation………...
31.
Desertification……………………….

_
_
_
_

Amount mobilised**…………………….
Origin of the fund mobilised**………….

____
_

E. For loans only
Terms of repayment
44.
Type of repayment………………………
45.
Number of repayments per annum………
46.
Interest rate………………………………
47.
Second interest rate……………………...
48.
First repayment date……………………..
49
Final repayment date…………………….

_
__
____
____
_______
_______

Other fields on debt
50.
Interest received…………………………
51.
Princial disbursed and still outstanding…
52.
Arrears of principal (included in field 51)
53.
Arrears of interest……………………….

____
____
____
____

F. Trial data collection
54.

RMNCH…………………………………

_

Example of scoring (not including all fields)
Provider
country

Recipient
country

Germany

Morocco

Sweden

Mali

Finance
Instrument

USD
amount
‘000

Solar power plant

ODA loan

Climate change
adaptation of forests
prone communities and
sustainable conservation
and management of
forests

ODA grant

Project Title

OECD DAC RIO MARKERS FOR CLIMATE: HANDBOOK

Sector

Mitigation

Adaptation

437 840

Energy generation
and supply

2

0

7 158

Forestry policy &
administrative
management

1

1

9

INDICATIVE TABLE TO GUIDE RIO MARKING BY SECTOR/SUB-SECTOR

This table provides guidance to support activity-level screening and marking against the Rio markers
on climate change mitigation and adaptation by sector. For each sector category, it indicates the most
appropriate scores to assign to activities, with the most likely score indicated first. For example, the
indication “0 or 1” means that activities in the sector concerned generally do not qualify against the
objective (score “0”) but there are circumstances where they do qualify as significant objective (score
“1”). For each sector, the table also explains the rationale for scoring activities and provides examples.
The table emerged from an exchange with members and international organisations and is based on
knowledge as of March 2016. It is not an exhaustive or prescriptive list, nor does it contain binding rules
on scores for each sector. Instead, it is intended to facilitate the application of markers to activities in
different sectors. Members may still apply scores different from the suggestions indicated in the table,
provided the activities concerned meet the definition and eligibility criteria of the markers. The guidance
provided in the table is also not intended to replace activity level screening. Instead, it seeks to support it.
In general, for climate change adaptation, the three-step approach described in the eligibility criteria is
recommended as a “best practice” prior to any adaptation scoring.

OECD DAC RIO MARKERS FOR CLIMATE: HANDBOOK

10

INDICATIVE TABLE TO GUIDE RIO MARKING BY SECTOR/SUB-SECTOR
Climate change adaptation and climate change mitigation

Adaptation

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

This table has benefitted from numerous members’ comments, examples from real projects included in the DAC CRS database and examples from the
MDB methodology to track climate finance projects. The table seeks to guide the scoring and provide useful examples for members’ scoring process. It is
important to clarify that the spirit of the markers is to promote mainstreaming of climate considerations in all sectors. The suggestions on scoring
(significant and principal) reflect the likelihood that the objective of the programme (mitigation, adaptation) is fundamental to its design (principal) or that
the programme has other prime objectives but has been formulated or adjusted to help meet the relevant environmental concerns (significant). They are
not intended to limit but rather to guide marking. Many examples now in the table could score either 2 or 1 as the methodology is based on the purpose of
the activity and not the type of activity. For example, a project aimed at developing or enhancing systems for monitoring drinking water in areas affected by
higher temperatures, floods and rising sea level, is likely to be scored 1 for adaptation, but could be also scored 2 if adaptation to climate change was the
main objective.

Examples of qualifying activities
Rationale for scoring

Scoring in
descending order of
likelihood

The list is not exhaustive. The activities may be scored
against the objective only if the eligibility criteria are
fulfilled.

EDUCATION – 110
All purpose codes in category 0, 1 or 2 0, 1 or 2 With careful environmental and climate assessment (e.g.
110
analysis of potential climate impacts and benefits), measures
in this sector may be climate-related, and score 2 may even be
appropriate for special mitigation- or adaptation-oriented
5
education programmes .
Article 4.1(i) and Article 6 of the Convention address the issues
of education, training and public awareness. Article 4.1(i)
provides that all Parties “promote and cooperate in education,
training and public awareness and encourage the widest
participation … including that of non-governmental
organisations”.
5.

Mitigation
 Strengthening of quality of higher education on science
and technology with a focus on renewable energy
(mitigation score 1).
 Off grid energy access for schools; sustainable school
buildings (i.e. natural cooling etc.) (mitigation score 2 or 1).
Mitigation and adaptation
 Integration of environmental/climate education into
school curricula (mitigation and/or adaptation score 2).

Note that in CRS, sector specific education activities are to be included in the respective sectors, either in a specific education code such as agricultural education (31181) or in a
general code such as communications policy/administrative management (22010).

11

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

Adaptation

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities

HEALTH – 120
POPULATION POLICIES/PROGRAMMES AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH – 130
All purpose codes in categories
120 & 130

0 or 1

0, 1 or 2 Mitigation
Activities in the health sector that reduce greenhouse gas
emissions can score 1.

Mitigation
 Activities in the health sector that use renewable energy
to support improved air quality, such as solar panels to heat
water in hospitals (mitigation score 1).
 Energy efficient hospital infrastructure that leads to
significant savings in energy consumption (mitigation score
1).

Adaptation
Health activities can be scored against the adaptation marker
if they aim or help to address the consequences of climate
change in the health of the population. Score 2 may even be
appropriate for special adaptation-oriented programmes.
Adaptation
 Health programmes to adapt to climate change, such as
the implementation of measures to control heat stress or
malaria in areas threatened by increased incidence of
diseases due to climate change (adaptation score 1).
 Strengthening food safety regulations, notably in terms
of microbiological quality, avoidance of contact with pest
species, in areas affected by higher temperatures
(adaptation score 1).

WATER AND SANITATION – 140
Water sector policy and 0, 1 or 2 1, 2 or 0
administrative management –
14010
Water supply and sanitation:
large systems – 14020
Water supply: large systems –
14021
Basic drinking water supply and
basic sanitation – 14030
Basic drinking water supply –
14031
Education and training in water
supply and sanitation – 14081

Mitigation
Mitigation
Activities in this sector can be scored against the mitigation  Energy-efficient water pumping systems, and/or
marker if the provision of water and/or sanitation, for pumping systems powered by renewable energies
example through the installation of new piping or pumping (mitigation score 1).
equipment, aims or helps to achieve significant energy
savings, as these processes are often associated to high Adaptation
energy use.
 Promoting water conservation in areas subject to
increased water stress due to climate change (adaptation
Adaptation
score 2). Otherwise it can score 1 if the project is designed
Activities can be scored against this marker if they aim or help to take into account climate change impacts.
to address the expected changes or fluctuations in water  Improving the climate resilience of the water supply and
supply as a consequence of climate change. Drinking water increasing storage to ensure access where climate change
and sanitation infrastructure can be vulnerable to disruption adaptation is a main objective (adaptation score 2), or is

12

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Sanitation-large systems
14022
Basic sanitation – 14032

Mitigation

Adaptation

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities

or destruction caused by flooding.
In regions that face or are projected to face
impacts/fluctuations in water availability and sanitation
services due to climate change (e.g. water shortages due to
drought or flooding, suboptimal functioning of sanitation
facilities during floods), the following types of investments can
score against adaptation:
 investments in improving the climate resilience of the
water supply and sanitation services,
 investments in increasing storage to ensure access
where climate change is expected to increase water
stress and shortages.
If the causal relationship is weak (e.g., a climate risk
assessment shows that water supply is not affected by climate
change in a region), the adaptation marker should not be
assigned.

part of broader initiatives to supply clean drinking water,
which will also increase the resilience of the population to
the effects of climate change (adaptation score 1).
 Measures to design and deliver water and sanitation
services which reduce vulnerability to floods of affected
water and sanitation infrastructure (adaptation score 1 or
2).

Mitigation and adaptation
Installation of systems that enable significant energy savings
compared to older systems may qualify against both
mitigation and adaptation markers as resource-efficient
systems reduce emissions while building resilience.
– 0, 1 or 2 1, 2 or 0 Mitigation
Mitigation
Activities that are designed to save a significant amount of  Introduction of energy-efficient pumps in the sewage
energy (e.g., if energy efficient pumps are employed) and/or system of a city (mitigation score 1).
to avoid methane gas emissions may justify a mitigation score
1. If energy use/energy efficiency is the central focus of the Adaptation
activity, mitigation score 2 may be justified.
 Treatment of water resources with the introduction of
recycled water (adaptation score 2)
Adaptation
 Wastewater management systems, or systems designed
Wastewater management systems protect existing water to protect the quality and quantity of existing water
resources and human health in the face of climate change. In resources in the face of climate change, e.g. through the
regions at risk of increased water scarcity due to climate recycling of wastewater:
change, such measures, if they provide significant positive
o If the design explicitly takes into account climate
effects for ground and/or surface water protection, can also
change risk (adaptation score 2);

13

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

Adaptation

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities

be considered having a climate change adaptation objective
o If it does not, but builds additional resilience, in the
(adaptation score 1 or 2), particularly if treated waste water is
face of multiple hazards including climate change
recycled.
(adaptation score 1).
Waste management /disposal – 2, 1 or 0 1 or 0 Mitigation
Mitigation
14050
Activities that promote modern waste-to-energy with waste  Biogas production and reuse of energy produced by
collection/recycling (especially separation of biogenic waste) wastewater facilities (mitigation score 2).
and recovery/use of methane gas can result in significant GHG
reductions and therefore justify the application of the Adaptation
mitigation marker (mitigation score 2).
 Project to reduce risks of urban flooding of water
If the methane gas is only flared the activity would score 1 and systems due to climate change and causing contamination
0 if not captured, as there are no emissions reductions though sewage overflow (adaptation score 1).
involved.
 Protect lagoons, which are highly vulnerable to climate
change, from salt-water intrusion and contamination
Adaptation
(adaptation score 1).
Effective waste management systems that protect water
resources or fragile ecosystems and strengthen their resilience
to the impacts of climate change can score against adaptation.
Water resources conservation 1, 0 or 2 1, 2 or 0 Mitigation
Mitigation
(incl. data collection) –14015
Water resources conservation involving the efficient use of  Protection and/or rehabilitation of water bodies,
River basin’s development –
energy or including forest preservation or other activities that swamps and wetlands as CO2 storage (mitigation score 1 or
14040
provide terrestrial carbon uptake benefits contribute to even 2 possible), related studies or research, e.g. limnology.
mitigation and can therefore score 1. However, when the
activity’s main purpose is mitigation, it is recommended to Adaptation
reclassify it to the environment protection sector (category  Developing or enhancing systems for monitoring
410).
drinking water, in areas affected by higher temperatures,
floods and rising sea level as a consequence of climate
Adaptation
change (adaptation score 1 or 2).
Water resources conservation is particularly important for
climate-resilience, especially if an assessment of climate Mitigation and adaptation
change risks include water shortages or high fluctuations in  Water basin management involving forest protection /
available water resources. In this specific case, adaptation reforestation for the purpose of reducing the severity of
score 2 may be appropriate, otherwise adaptation is floods while increasing carbon uptake (mitigation score 1,
considered as a secondary objective (adaptation score 1).
adaptation score 2 if main objective).

14

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

Rationale for scoring

Adaptation

Examples of qualifying activities

Data collection measures that are carried out with the aim of
contributing to the monitoring and detecting the
meteorological and hydrological impacts of climate change
and providing an evidence base for climate change risk
assessment can be scored as 1 with the adaptation marker or
even 2 if main objective.

GOVERNMENT AND CIVIL SOCIETY – 150
All purpose codes in category 0, 1 or 2 0, 1 or 2 Development programmes that integrate climate change
150
considerations or promote climate change action can score for
mitigation and/or adaptation, if properly justified (score 1
6
most likely) .

Mitigation
 Development/preparation of low-carbon development
strategies (mitigation score 2).
Adaptation
 Programme to build leadership and entrepreneurship
for effective local action in health, agriculture and nutrition
in a changing climate and environment (adaptation
score 1).

OTHER SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES – 160
All purpose codes in category 0,1 or 2
160

0, 1 or 2 Specific activities in the social infrastructure sector can include
mitigation and adaptation measures. Activities can score
against the mitigation marker if designed to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. For the adaptation marker,
activities dedicated to climate proofing social infrastructure
and services can be considered. Examples can be found more
frequently in the health and education sectors.

Mitigation
 Implementation of Nationally Appropriated Mitigation
Actions (NAMA) in low-carbon housing (mitigation score 2).
Adaptation
 Support of vulnerable people including women and
children in areas vulnerable to the effects of climate change
through promotion of climate resilient agriculture, food
security and basic services (adaptation score 1 or 2).

TRANSPORT AND STORAGE – 210
Transport
policy
and 2, 1 or 0 0, 1 or 2
administrative management –
21010
Storage – 21061
Education and training in
6.

Mitigation
Mitigation
Activities targeted to supporting the development of transport  Non-motorised transportation planning to reduce GHG
sector policy and planning can incorporate measures to emissions (cycling and walking) from transport (mitigation
promote GHG emission reductions that are focused exclusively score 2).
on traffic reduction through the development and/or  New infrastructure, capacity building and/or

Development of climate change strategies should be coded under Environmental Policy and administrative management – 41010.

15

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

Adaptation

transport and storage – 21081

Road transport –21020
Rail transport –21030
Water transport –21040
Air transport- 21050

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities

integration of public transport and non-motorised improvements to existing systems (integrated traffic
transportation pursues (mitigation score 2 or 1).
management systems, driver training, etc.) that lead to
significant reductions in GHG emissions (mitigation score 2).
Adaptation
 A transit-oriented development (TOD), a mixed-use
Climate-proofing transport infrastructure as a requirement in residential and commercial area designed to maximize
transport policies and strategies can be scored against the access to public transport, can contribute significantly to
adaptation marker if properly justified.
GHG reduction (mitigation score 1).

1, 2 or 0

0 or 1

Adaptation
 Inclusion of climate change considerations in transport
planning (e.g. climate proofing of road construction to
account for climate change impacts and variability)
(adaptation score 1 or 2).
Mitigation
Mitigation
An activity in the transport sector that aims at reducing GHG  Public transport with an objective to reduce GHG
emissions will score 1 or 2 on the mitigation marker emissions (subway, light rail, bus rapid transit, trams, etc.)
depending on the purpose of the project and the expected (mitigation score 1 or even 2 if the main objective is to
reduction of GHG emissions. If the project does not intend to reduce GHG emissions).
reduce GHG emissions the activity will score 0.
 A measure to shift from road to rail or water
transportation
can
significantly
reduce
GHGs
Adaptation
(mitigation score 1 or 2).
If the measure significantly improves the resilience of  Optimisation of conventional and conversion to
transportation routes to extreme weather events or gradual alternative engine technologies: energy efficiency and fuel
changes in climate (e.g., sea level rise, rising temperatures), it switching has expected reduction of GHG emissions as
is justified to score 1 against the adaptation marker.
some of the main objectives (mitigation score 2).
 Road building itself, however, does not entail relevant
reduction of GHG emissions, even if the new road shortens
transport routes, as new roads generate increased traffic
(mitigation score 0) unless the road also promotes the use
of climate-friendly transport (e.g., the construction of
bicycle and bus lanes) (mitigation score 1).
 Switching to electric mobility, hydrogen power, liquefied
natural gas, and hybrid engines (mitigation score 2).

16

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

Rationale for scoring

Adaptation

Examples of qualifying activities
Adaptation
 Improved access to roads all year round for population
vulnerable to climate change impact (adaptation score 1).

COMMUNICATIONS – 220
All purpose codes in category 0, 1 or 2
220

0, 1 or2 Mitigation
For a communications project to score mitigation 1 or 2, it
would need to establish a link between the communications
technology and mitigation.
Adaptation
A communications project could be scored 1 or 2 in adaptation
if it consists in strengthening resilience of communication
equipment.

Mitigation
 Promoting research in satellite information for climate
modelling purposes (mitigation score 1).
Adaptation
 Identification of key national data centres at greatest
risk of suffering damage from storms or floods, and
enhancement of climate resilience of those sites
(adaptation score 2).
Mitigation and adaptation
 Improvement of the meteorological radar system in
order to improve the information on changes to land-use,
land cover, forestry, water, etc. (adaptation and mitigation
score 1, possibly score 2 for one marker).

ENERGY GENERATION, DISTRIBUTION AND EFFICIENCY – 230
Energy
policy
and 2, 1 or 0 0, 1 or 2
administrative management –
23110
Energy education/training –
23181
Energy research – 23182

Mitigation
Mitigation
Activities that develop/foster appropriate regulatory efforts to  Regulatory policy reform in the energy sector to take
promote energy efficiency and renewable energy, including into account climate change mitigation efforts (mitigation
climate change considerations, score against mitigation. score 2).
However, activities in the energy sector, as for other sectors,
do not score against mitigation “by default”, and in the event Adaptation
that climate change is not taken into account, the scoring  Enhancing the capacity and regulatory capabilities of the
would be 0.
Regulatory Authority to deal with climate change impacts
(adaptation score 2).
 Supporting local authorities to improve security of their
energy supply by designing resilient energy infrastructure
(adaptation score 1).

17

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

Energy
conservation
and
demand-side efficiency – 23183

2 or 1

Adaptation

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities

0, 1 or 2 Mitigation
Mitigation
7
The primary objective of energy efficiency measures is  Retrofit efficiency improvement in the energy sector
normally to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, even if (mitigation score 2).
simultaneous objectives also exist (e.g., security of supply,  Cogeneration (mitigation score 2 if substantially more
reduced energy bills, productivity benefits and reduced efficient than separate generation).
foreign exchange outflows and volatility linked to fossil fuel  Clean cook stoves (mitigation score 2).
imports.).
 Renewable energy power plant retrofits, improvements
in energy efficiency in existing thermal plants (mitigation
The following principles help determining whether an energy score 1).
efficiency project qualifies for mitigation:
 Fuel switching from one fuel to a different, less GHGintensive fuel type qualifies as mitigation (score 1 or 2) if a
 The general principle for brownfield energy efficiency 8 net emission reduction can be demonstrated taking
activities involving retrofitting or the substitution of extensions of capacity and lifetime of the facility into
technologies or processes is that (i) the old technologies are account.
substituted well before the end of their lifetime and the new  Combined heat and power plants: heat generation can
technologies are more efficient, or (ii) new technologies or also be associated with energy efficiency if combined with
processes are more efficient than those normally used in power generation.
greenfield projects.
Mitigation and adaptation
 The general principle for greenfield energy efficiency
 Clean cooking solutions that are less dependent on
activities is that they prevent a long-term lock-in in GHGtraditional biomass are both relevant for mitigation and
intensive infrastructure (urban, transport and power sector
adaptation (making cooking food less dependent on climate
infrastructure).
vulnerable biomass resources) (mitigation score 2and
adaptation score 1).
Adaptation
In some cases, energy efficiency measures in construction and  Efficiency in new construction (exceeding available
retrofitting can also have climate change adaptation standards) and retrofitting of existing buildings, e.g.,
objectives, e.g. to build resilience in the energy system in the improving the efficiency of air conditioning of hospitals in
hot regions (mitigation score 1 and adaptation score 1).
case of disaster event (adaptation score 1).

7.

Energy efficiency can be a relevant part of projects not only in the energy sector but in the industry, transport, construction, education sectors.

8.

“Brownfield” energy efficiency activities include those in already built environments (including industrial processes, energy generation facilities, water treatment plants, etc.).
“Greenfield” energy efficiency activities imply the construction of new equipment/infrastructure.

18

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

Adaptation

Energy generation, renewable
sources – 232

2 or 1

0 or 1

Energy
generation,
renewable sources – 233

non-

0 or 1

0

Hybrid energy electric power
plants – 23410

1 or 0

Heating, cooling and energy 2, 1 or 0
distribution – 236

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities

Mitigation
Mitigation
The main objective of renewable energy production is typically  Wind energy, photovoltaic and concentrated solar
to reduce GHG emissions through project development or the power (CSP), geothermal, biomass and biogas, ocean tide
creation of enabling environments for the development and power score for mitigation (mitigation score 1 or 2 if main
dissemination of the skills and technologies necessary to objective).
expand renewable generation.
 Hydropower (storage or run-of-the-river) only if net
emission reductions can be demonstrated. (mitigation score
The rationale for projects to qualify as mitigation is that, in the 1 or 2).
absence of the renewable energy construction/rehabilitation,  Support to institutional framework in biofuels
high GHG emitting energy sources would be used. Not only are (mitigation score 1).
direct effects (e.g., observed emission reductions) taken into  Training in renewable energy (mitigation score 2).
account, but also projected impacts on future emissions, i.e.,
changes in future GHG emission trajectories compared to Adaptation
reference case ("business as usual") scenarios.
 New hydro-power activity that takes into account the
impact of climate change on water resources and uses
Adaptation
modern engineering techniques (adaptation score 1).
If specific measures take into account climate change impacts  Optimizing hydropower generation and dam safety in
(and therefore aim at improving the resilience to climate), the the context of climate change vulnerability (adaptation
activity can be scored against the adaptation marker.
score 1).

Mitigation
Generally, thermal power plants’ objective is not to limit
emissions of GHGs and they will therefore not comply with the
eligibility criteria of the climate mitigation marker. However,
there may be cases where energy efficiency aspects make
projects eligible to be scored as climate change mitigation,
where they involve reducing GHG emissions of an energy
generation process.
0
Mitigation
Hybrid power plants (i.e. blending a renewable source with a
fossil fuel to reduce the emissions compared with a fossil fuelonly baseline) may score mitigation 1.
0, 1 or 2 Mitigation
In order for electric power transmission and distribution
activities to qualify for the mitigation marker it is important to

19

Mitigation
 Activities in which existing power plants switch to lower
emitting fuels (e.g., switching from coal to natural gas)
(mitigation score 1).

Mitigation
 Integration of renewable sources into local or national
grid, or energy efficiency measures in grid retrofitting:

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

Adaptation

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities

ensure that the investment is not in energy-intensive
technologies. The scoring is directly linked to the purpose of
the activity, which will be different if designed to reduce GHG
emissions and mitigate climate change as main objective, or if
the measures are complementary to the primary objective of
the activity. Note that:
 Investments in network infrastructure can minimise
power losses; therefore a mitigation score 1 can be assigned.
 In countries/regions where network expansion also allows
for the extension/connection of renewable energy, a
mitigation marker score 2 can be applied. Investment in
innovative/smart grid technologies pursues reduction of GHG
as the main target since they create the infrastructure for the
use of renewable energies or allow for efficiency gains/loss
reduction; therefore a marker 2 can be applied.

construction of new transmission/distribution lines,
transformers, and substations, grid rehabilitation,
deployment of innovative network technologies (mitigation
score 1 or 2).
 New ‘off-grid’ systems (typically integrating energy
storage, management and appliances) - allowing delivery of
renewable energy directly to houses, businesses and/or
community services without integration with the grid (e.g.
mini-grids, home systems) (mitigation score 1 or 2).
 Rural electrification measures designed so that energyefficient technologies are employed or distributed
(mitigation score 1). The reference scenario "use of diesel
generators" could also be taken into account when
considering the expected GHG impacts of the activity, and
to inform the mitigation score.

In the context of heat generation, heat-only plants that use
renewable energy sources (including solar, geothermal,
biomass, etc.) can score 2 for mitigation.

Adaptation
 Strengthening of energy transmission and distribution
infrastructure if the main objective is to cope with the
impacts of climate change (adaptation score 2).
 Energy access through rural electrification which
enables early warning systems to be heard/received,
information to be attained/communicated; electrical power
increases ability to store harvests, to refrigerate medicines,
study at night, more efficient irrigation technology – etc.
(adaptation score 1).

Adaptation
If the design of modern networks is expected to increase the
security of supply in case of extreme weather events caused
by climate change and based on a context/vulnerability
assessment, then the adaptation score 1 can be justified.

BANKING AND FINANCIAL SERVICES – 240
All purpose codes in category 0,1 or 2
240

9.

9

0,1 or 2 Credit lines (or other financial products in support of the Mitigation
finance sector) specifically designed for the development of  Dedicated credit lines to finance renewable energy
renewable energy, the support of low-carbon investments, investments (mitigation score 2).
energy efficiency or climate adaptation qualify for the climate  Promotion of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises’

In the CRS, depending on main focus, credit lines in support of the finance sector specifically designed for the development of renewable energy or for energy savings may be
recorded under the energy sector (230).

20

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

Adaptation

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities

markers (the marking and score dependent on the
prominence of mitigation and/or adaptation in investment
criteria for the credit lines).

energy saving efforts through providing medium-term and
long-term funds for energy conservation measures and
raising awareness of energy saving via local development
financial institutions (mitigation score 1 or 2).
Adaptation
 Climate insurance fund to facilitate the adaptation to
climate change for businesses and households through
better access to adequate insurance solutions (adaptation
score 2).
 Creation of infrastructure and hubs that would support
improved business continuity during and after extreme
weather events (adaptation score 1).

BUSINESS AND OTHER SERVICES – 250
All purpose codes in category 1, 0 or 2
250

1, 2 or 0 Support to the mainstreaming of climate change Mitigation
considerations in businesses and services can be scored  Finance measures in the field of climate protection for
against adaptation or mitigation marker.
preparing and supporting private investment on a publicprivate partnership basis (PPP). (mitigation score 2).
Mitigation
Activities including the provision of advice to business in Adaptation
greening their practices or incentives for private sector to  Tools to strengthen the capacity of the private sector for
include climate change concepts in their strategies or guide climate change (adaptation score 1 or 2).
their investment can score mitigation 1.
 Linking initiatives, stakeholders and knowledge for
If the main objective is to implement projects to reduce GHG climate resilient livelihood security including vulnerability to
emissions, then it can be scored against mitigation 2.
climate change (adaptation score 1).
Adaptation
Business and services can contribute to climate change
adaptation in a number of ways e.g. by diversifying income
opportunities for communities that cannot continue their
traditional way of life as a result of climate change but also by
supporting the development, distribution or adoption of new
technologies to better deal with climate change.

21

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

Adaptation

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities

AGRICULTURE - 311
All purpose codes in category 0, 1 or 2 1, 2 or 0 Mitigation
311
Scoring against mitigation may be justified when farming
methods decrease GHG emissions or increase carbon
sequestration.
Adaptation
Agricultural development measures can, in many ways,
increase resilience to the impacts of climate change, through
the use of climate-resilient crops or diversifying production to
be able to better cope with the impacts of climate change.

Mitigation:
 Livestock projects that reduce methane or other GHG
emissions (manure management with biodigestors, etc.)
(mitigation score 1).
 Increase and maintenance of the CO2-binding capacity
of soil and vegetation (mitigation score 1).
 Use of energy saving machineries, design of ecoefficient, carbon neutral systems etc. (mitigation score 2).
Adaptation
 Sustainable
climate-resilient
farming
methods
(adaptation score 2).
 Promoting diversified agricultural production to reduce
climate risk (e.g. growing a mix of different crops and
different varieties of each crop) (adaptation score 1 or 2).
 Promoting heat and drought resistant crops and water
saving irrigation methods to withstand climate change
(adaptation score 2).
 Cultivate and distribute climate-resilient seeds
(adaptation score 2).
 Set up/use of early warning communications system for
agricultural purposes (e.g. communications/IT solutions for
monitoring crops, precipitation, temperature etc. to avoid
crop loss through climate-related stress or disaster)
(adaptation score 1 or 2).

FORESTRY – 312
All purpose codes in category 2, 1 or 0 0, 1 or 2 Mitigation
312
In the case of a monocrop forest plantation with important
economic and social benefits, scoring against mitigation will
depend on how the trees grown are utilised after they are cut.
If they are used for energy production (i.e. turned into
charcoal for fuel) there are no net carbon sequestration
benefits (mitigation score 0), unless cleared areas are

22

Mitigation
 Protection and enhancement of sinks and reservoirs of
GHGs
through
sustainable
forest
management,
afforestation and reforestation (mitigation score 2),
rehabilitation of areas affected by drought and
desertification. (mitigation score 1 or 2 if main objective).

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

Adaptation

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities

systematically replanted (mitigation score 1 for sustainable
biomass production, or even 2 if sustainably managed wood
fuel plantations demonstrably reduce pressure on natural
forests).

Adaptation
 Restoration of former forest areas utilising natural seed
banks and existing plants, in order to reduce vulnerability of
forest ecosystems to the impacts of climate change
(adaptation score 2).
 Promoting sustainable forest management and adopting
harvesting techniques that reduce soil erosion and
exposure to wildfires, and promote the conservation of
biodiversity in order to safeguard forest ecosystems from
the impacts of climate change (adaptation score 2).
 Afforestation in a river basin can contribute to a more
stable hydrologic regime and to reduce floods (adaptation
score 2 or 1).

Adaptation
Improved forest management and reforestation/afforestation
can enhance adaptation capacities. Specific activities that fulfil
the eligibility requirements can score against the adaptation
markers.
Mitigation and adaptation
There are various mitigation and adaptation effects for
forestry/afforestation measures which usually result in a
combination of both climate markers (but scoring both
mitigation and adaptation as a principal objective should
remain exceptional).
Since forest has a particularly important role in CO2 storage,
there is usually more emphasis on GHG reduction for these
activities, but they can support adaptation (e.g. resilient
forest-based livelihoods, reduced soil erosion).

FISHING - 313
All purpose codes in category
313

0 or 1

0,1 or 2 Mitigation
A score of 1 can be justified if the activity scored has a clear
mitigation objective to reduce GHG emissions.
Adaptation
Fishing is a critical sector for many economies, including small
island states. If the objective is to improve the conditions of
the sector by increasing its resilience to climate change it can
be marked as adaptation 1 or 2, if properly justified and the
information regarding the context of vulnerability is available.

23

Mitigation
 A project that supports the use of more fuel-efficient
boats, made with innovative material and hull shape, and
equipped with more efficient engines and storage capacity
to reduce the consumption of fuel can score 1 in mitigation.
Adaptation
 Promoting changes in fishing practices to adapt to
changes in stocks and target species. Introducing flexibility
in the gear that is used, the species that are fished, the
fishing areas to be managed, and the allocations that are

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

Adaptation

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities
harvested (adaptation score 1).
 Mapping changes in the range of fish species and
strengthening the monitoring of fish stocks to determine
the impacts of climate change (adaptation score 2).
Mitigation and adaptation
 Activities that aim at reducing overfishing and excess
capacity, including adjusting fleet composition, by
supporting small-scale fisheries and discouraging industrial
fisheries, especially in countries where fish stocks have
been fully or partially overexploited, can score both for
adaptation and mitigation marker. Such measures would
reduce fuel use as a result of the reduction in the number
of vessels at sea and increase the catch per unit effort
(CPUE) (mitigation score 1).

INDUSTRY – 321
All purpose codes in category 0, 1 or 2 0, 1 or 2 Inclusive and sustainable industries can be marked as
321
mitigation or adaptation.
Mitigation
For mitigation, changes in the demand patterns influence the
resource chain and have impacts on GHG emissions.
Improvements in processes and cleaner production (e.g.
cement, chemicals) can bring mitigation benefits. A mitigation
marker score 1 can be applied to relevant improvements in
the production methods to reduce emission of GHG emissions.
Adaptation
Activities designed to include considerations of climate change
impacts, like design of climate-resilient equipment, can be
scored against the adaptation marker with score 1, or even 2
depending on the purpose of the activity.

24

Mitigation
 Promotion of adoption of energy-efficiency standards
and other environmental standards expected to reduce
GHG emissions as part of trade-related assistance
(mitigation score 1 if a sufficiently prominent objective).
Adaptation
 Retrofitting of industrial facilities to enhance resilience
to climate-related risks (adaptation score 1).
 Switching to less water consuming production
technologies reduces vulnerability against water shortage
(adaptation score 1).

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

Adaptation

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities

Mitigation
Improvements in energy efficiency of mining industry and the
use of renewable energy as power source could be scored
against the mitigation marker if properly justified.

Mitigation
 Improvement of energy efficiency measures in mining
process (mitigation score 1).

MINERAL RESOURCES AND MINING – 322
All purpose codes in category 0 or 1
322

0 or 1

Adaptation
Climate change considerations in the improved design of
mining activities could be scored against the adaptation
marker if properly justified.

Adaptation
 Analytical studies or capacity building to improve
climate resilience of mining industries (adaptation score 1).
 Changes in the design of open pit mines to adapt to
flooding due to increased precipitation can be scored
against adaptation (adaptation score 1).

CONSTRUCTION – 323
All purpose codes in category 0, 1 or 2 0, 1 or 2 Construction sector policy and planning. If the activity is in a
323
specific sector it should be assigned to the sector (e.g.
hospitals in health or schools in education).
Mitigation
Improvements in regulation and professional practice to
include energy efficiency measures, passive design and choice
of low carbon materials (such as sustainably sourced timber
and low carbon cement) in buildings could qualify as
mitigation activities.
Adaptation
Inclusion of resilience concepts in the construction process
could be marked as adaptation.

Mitigation
 Promotion of energy-efficient building techniques,
development and enforcement of related standards and
certification schemes (mitigation score 2).
 Programme of activities (PoA) in energy efficiency in the
construction sector (mitigation score 2).
Adaptation
 More robust building regulations and improved
enforcement practices when there is a shift in zones
affected by typhoons/ hurricanes/storm surges (adaptation
score 2).

TRADE – 331
All purpose codes in category 0 or 1
331

0, 1 or 2 Trade can be disrupted by climate-related disasters and
therefore can be subject to activities that are focused on
mitigating the causes of climate change or adapting to the
effects of it.

25

Mitigation
 Development of carbon market mechanisms for
developing countries in the context of climate conventions
(mitigation score 1).

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

Adaptation

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities
Adaptation
 Assessment of climate change impacts and damages on
trade and economic growth (adaptation score 2).

TOURISM – 332
All purpose codes in category 0, 1 or 2 0, 1 or 2 Tourism activities that foster sustainable development Mitigation
332
practices that incorporate mitigation and/or adaptation  Sustainable tourism development by introducing zeroconcepts qualify as mitigation or adaptation. The objective carbon business solutions, e.g. zero-carbon resorts, touristic
should clearly state the impacts of climate change in the products etc. (mitigation score 2).
modified activity.
 Contributing to conservation of tourist attractions that
reduce GHG emissions, e.g. forests, national parks
(mitigation score 1).
Adaptation
 Diversification of tourist attractions to encompass areas
less prone to the risks and impacts of climate change
(adaptation score 2).
 Promotion of eco-tourism as part of a strategy to
maintain the resilience of natural ecosystems while
diversifying rural livelihoods (adaptation score 1 or 2).

GENERAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION – 410
Environmental
Policy
and 2, 1 or 0 2, 1 or 0 Institutional reforms and strengthening to include climate Mitigation:
administrative management –
aspects in policies and regulations (such as national and  Preparation of national inventories of greenhouse gases
41010
subnational climate change strategies and planning) can score (emissions by sources and removals by sinks) (mitigation
against mitigation or adaptation.
score 2).
 Elaboration of climate change-related policy and
economic analysis and instruments, including national plans
to mitigate climate change (mitigation score 2).
 Climate technology needs’ surveys and assessments;
institutional capacity building (mitigation score 1 or 2).
Adaptation:
 Development and implementation of adaptation
strategies at national level or in the context of decentralisation programmes (adaptation score 2).

26

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Biosphere protection – 41020
Biodiversity – 41030

Flood
41050

prevention/control

Mitigation

Adaptation

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities

 Supporting the integration of climate change adaptation
into national and international policy, plans and
programmes (adaptation score 2).
 Improving regulations and legislation to provide
incentives to adapt (adaptation score 1 or 2).
 Dedicated budget support to a national or local
authorities for climate change adaptation policy
implementation (adaptation score 2)
1, 2 or 0 1, 2 or 0 There are various mitigation and adaptation effects for this Mitigation:
topic which usually result in a combination of both climate  Preservation of the CO2 storage capacity of vegetation
markers (but scoring both mitigation and adaptation as a cover (especially forests) and soil (especially wetlands)
principal objective should remain exceptional).
(mitigation score 1 or 2).
 Protection and enhancement of sinks and reservoirs
through sustainable management and conservation of
oceans and other marine and coastal ecosystems, wetlands,
wilderness areas and other ecosystems (mitigation score 1
or 2).

– 0 or 1

2 or 1

Adaptation:
 Contribution to the preservation of water resources or
erosion prevention to adapt to the effects of climate
change (adaptation score 1).
 Climate resilient conservation measures allowing
species to adapt to climate change (e.g., protected ecocorridors for migration) (adaptation score 2).
 Ecosystem based adaptation, i.e. the use of ecosystems
or ecosystem services to help people to adapt to climate
change (e.g. wetland restoration and management to
enhance continuity of drinking water supply in drought
prone areas) (adaptation score 2).
Mitigation
Mitigation
In specific cases where flood prevention and control measures  Flood protection measures that reduce the
include GHG emission reductions, the activity could score 1 for consumption of energy and reduce GHG emissions
mitigation if properly justified.
(mitigation score 1).

27

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Environmental
education/training – 41081
Environmental
research
41082

Mitigation

Adaptation

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities

Adaptation
Flood and coastal protection, as well as drainage measures
often directly relate to the impacts of climate change
(adaptation score 2). For measures not primarily employed for
adaptation to the impacts of climate change, or measures that
are only part of larger measures, adaptation score 1 is
appropriate.

Adaptation
 Flood protection measures in areas which are becoming
increasingly flood-sensitive (e.g. closing of estuaries,
building of dikes and sea defences, restoration of wetlands)
– with due consideration for the potential environmental
impacts of such measures (adaptation score 2 or 1).
 Restoring the function of floodplains in combination
with sound land-use planning of watersheds and wetlands
thereby reducing the exposure to floods and improving
water availability in areas affected by increasing water
scarcity and/or more variable rainfall patterns (including
higher amounts of rain) (adaptation score 2).

2, 1 or 0 2, 1 or 0 Mitigation and adaptation
Mitigation:
Activities that are focused on providing training for climate  Climate-change-mitigation related research and
–
change adaptation and mitigation can score 1 or 2 against monitoring. Oceanographic and atmospheric research and
adaptation and mitigation markers.
monitoring (mitigation score 2).
Adaptation:
 Adaptation-related
climate
research
including
meteorological and hydrological observation and
forecasting, impact and vulnerability assessments, etc.
(adaptation score 2).
Mitigation and adaptation
 Education, training and public awareness related to
climate change, the causes and impacts of climate change
and the role of adaptation (mitigation and adaptation
score 2).

OTHER MULTISECTOR – 430
Urban
development
management – 43030

and 1, 2 or 0 1, 2 or 0 Urban development activities often address environmental Mitigation:
and climate issues.
 Energy efficiency planning in cities (mitigation score 2).

28

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

Adaptation

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities

Mitigation
If reduction aspects are at the centre of a measure (e.g., public
transport development and more efficient service delivery
through compact town planning), mitigation gets scored 2
while adaptation is likely to score 0.

Adaptation:
 Support to development of climate action plans with
vulnerability assessments in cities (adaptation score 2).

Adaptation
If the issue of adaptation to climate change is central to a
measure's purpose (e.g., ecological measures counteracting
overheating in urban areas) adaptation gets scored 2 and
mitigation is likely to score 0.

Rural development – 43040

1 or 0

Mitigation and adaptation
In many cases, sustainable urban development is equally
beneficial to both strands (mitigation score 1 and adaptation
score 1).
When urban development activities do not address climate
aspects as a priority (e.g., activities that are dedicated
primarily to improving the lives of slum dwellers), the content
of the activity determines whether climate is a secondary
objective.
1, 0 or 2 Mitigation
Mitigation:
A rural development project can score 1 against the mitigation  Securing land and use rights in order to avoid changes in
marker if there are measures put into place to reduce the land use that could lead to increased emissions of GHG,
emissions of GHG.
contribution to sustainable long-term land-use planning,
reducing emissions from land use and changes in land use
Adaptation
(mitigation score 1).
Activities that include measures to increase resilience of
population or ecosystems in rural areas to climate change can Adaptation:
score 1 if properly justified, taking into account the context of  Sustainable agriculture for adaptation to climate change
vulnerability.
in vulnerable regions, sustainable regional development in
rural drought areas (adaptation score 2).
Mitigation and adaptation
Regional development planning, land use issues, land
management, and many additional aspects of rural

29

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Research
and
institutions – 43082

Mitigation

Rationale for scoring

Adaptation

Examples of qualifying activities

development offer a variety of approaches to integrate GHG
mitigation and climate change adaptation.
For land use and land management measures, especially
protection of forest or wetlands, mitigation may be of primary
significance (mitigation score 1 or 2 while adaptation may
score 0).
scientific
Scoring depends on the thematic focus of the funded
0, 1 or 2 0, 1 or 2
organisations and all scoring combinations are thus possible.

GENERAL BUDGET SUPPORT – 510
General budget support (GBS) is by definition un-earmarked and is excluded from marking (see paragraph 5). Sector budget support can be marked. However,
possible options for qualifying GBS flows in terms of their degree of focus on the Rio conventions could be pursued: a number of partner countries are developing
climate-specific budget codes/tagging; as a result monitoring the recipient country’s domestic expenditure on climate activities and possibly other environmental
aspects could be possible.10
DEVELOPMENTAL FOOD AID/FOOD SECURITY ASSISTANCE – 520
Food aid/food security
programmes – 52010

0

0, 1 or 2 Adaptation
Activities in the area of food security can be scored against the
adaptation marker if the objectives of the project explicitly
include the building of climate resilience in food production.

Adaptation
 A programme addressing food insecurity which also
builds capacity to cope with the impacts of climate change
on food production could be marked as significant
(adaptation score 1).

DEBT – 600
Excluded from marking (see paragraph 5) except for debt swaps which can be specifically targeted to environmental purposes.

HUMANITARIAN AID – 700
Emergency response – 720

10.

0 or 1

0 or 1

In the case of a situation which results from natural disasters,
the short term response to support the affected population
can score mitigation or adaptation 1 if designed with a clear
link to climate change in terms of GHG emission reductions or
improvement of adaptive capacity and resilience.

Mitigation
 Provision of solar lights for use during emergency
responses (mitigation score 1).

Members are currently not required to indicate the Rio/environment focus of GBS data. There may be rationale to revisit this however, in recognition of the 2011 Busan
commitments on effective development co-operation to increase the use of country systems. Going forward, possible options for qualifying these flows in terms of their degree of
focus could be pursued using a more refined methodology. Options include: i) Reviews of GBS donor co-ordination groups in recipient countries: these reviews could provide
information on the content of policy dialogue that accompanies GBS and report on the specific measures taken to address biodiversity/climate/desertification/environment-related
objectives, and ii) Monitoring of the recipient country’s domestic expenditure on biodiversity/climate/desertification/environment-related activities.

30

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

Reconstruction
relief
rehabilitation – 73010

and 0 or 1

Disaster
prevention
preparedness – 74010

and 0 or 1

11.

Adaptation

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities

0, 1 or 2 Mitigation
Mitigation
Restoration of services or repairing of infrastructure with the  Review and assess the adequacy of current
incorporation of low carbon technologies (such as efficient environmental management practices on a range of
batteries, solar panels for heating water or electricity) could humanitarian activities (mitigation score 1).
be marked as mitigation.
Adaptation
Adaptation
 Activity to support the early recovery and
In the aftermath of a natural disaster caused or hardened by reconstruction as well as establishment of resilient society /
climate change, the improvement of capabilities to cope with community (“build-back better”) in disaster-affected areas
natural disasters caused by climate change can be marked as (adaptation score 1 or 2).
adaptation,
1, 2 or 0 Mitigation
Mitigation
Activities that include the provision of services/tools to be  Provision of solar lights in anticipation for a disaster
better prepared in case of occurrence of a disaster can qualify impacted by climate change (mitigation score 1).
to score 1 in mitigation if they lead to significant GHG emission
reductions.
Adaptation
 Developing emergency prevention and preparedness
Adaptation
measures including insurance schemes to cope with
Activities that aim at reducing the vulnerability (or potential climatic disasters such as floods or landslides
strengthening the resilience) of the population, the economy, (adaptation score 2).
and its infrastructure against the short-term negative  Support to Civil Protection Team to improve their
consequences of climate change related disasters can score 1 information on climate change impacts through the use of
or 2 against the adaptation marker, depending on the purpose satellite-based maps in the preparation of event scenarios
of the activity (adaptation score 1 is appropriate if the and rescue plans after the heavy monsoon rains that
measure is not directly aimed at adapting to climate change, caused floods (adaptation score 1).
but still significantly contributes to it).
 Developing emergency preparedness plans and disaster
risk reduction strategies in order to protect key
11
Climate risk management which consists in preventing and infrastructure assets from the impacts of climate change;
dealing with long-term loss and damage resulting from climate this includes setting up early warning systems, addressing
change (e.g., impacts of sea level rise) qualifies for adaptation governance
issues
and
promoting
awareness
score 2.
(adaptation score 2).
 Promoting disaster preparedness and the links to

Note the risk of confusion with terms when climate risk management is referred to as climate risk “mitigation”; the latter can be misinterpreted as “mitigation” instead of
“adaptation” related.

31

Sector/CRS purpose codes

Mitigation

Adaptation

Rationale for scoring

Examples of qualifying activities
climate change adaptation at various levels of government
as well as at community level (adaptation score 2).
 Social protection for climate disasters: e.g. as part of a
pre-disaster preparedness programme which seeks to build
resilience to potential future climate related disasters,
having a social protection scheme in place to enable
emergency cash transfers to happen when a flood/storm
strikes – means poorest people don’t need to sell down
their assets in the immediate aftermath of a disaster
(adaptation score 1 or 2 if main objective).

ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS – 910
Excluded from marking (see Converged Statistical Reporting Directives, Annex 18, paragraph 5).

REFUGEES IN DONOR COUNTRIES – 930
Excluded from marking (see Converged Statistical Reporting Directives, Annex 18, paragraph 5).

UNALLOCATED – 998

32

http://oe.cd/RioMarkers

